# Feasibility of peak temperature targets in light of institutional constraints

Christoph Bertram, Elina Brutschin, Laurent Drouet, Gunnar Luderer, Bas van Ruijven, Lara Aleluia Reis, Luiz Bernardo Baptista, Harmen-Sytze de Boer, Ryna Cui, Vassilis Daioglou, Florian Fosse, Dimitris Fragkiadakis, Oliver Fricko, Shinichiro Fujimori, Nate Hultman, Gokul Iyer, Kimon Keramidas, Volker Krey, Elmar Kriegler, Robin D. Lamboll, Rahul Mandaroux, Pedro Rochedo, Joeri Rogelj, Roberto Schaeffer, Diego Silva, Isabela Tagomori, Detlef van Vuuren, Zoi Vrontisi, Keywan Riahi

Despite faster-than-expected progress in clean energy technology deployment, global annual CO₂ emissions have increased from 2020 to 2023. The feasibility of limiting warming to 1.5°C is therefore questioned. Here we present a model intercomparison study that accounts for emissions trends until 2023 and compares cost-effective scenarios to alternative scenarios with institutional, geophysical and technological feasibility constraints and enablers informed by previous literature. Our results show that the most ambitious mitigation trajectories with updated climate information still manage to limit peak warming to below 1.6°C ('low overshoot') with around 50% likelihood. However, feasibility constraints, especially in the institutional dimension, decrease this maximum likelihood considerably to 5–45%. Accelerated energy demand transformation can reduce costs for staying below 2°C but have only a limited impact on further increasing the likelihood of limiting warming to 1.6°C. Our study helps to establish a new benchmark of mitigation scenarios that goes beyond the dominant cost-effective scenario design.

Global temperature rise is expected to peak around the time when global CO₂ emissions reach net-zero levels. Reaching global net-zero CO₂ emissions quickly while limiting cumulative emissions therefore lies at the core of achieving the long-term goal of the Paris Agreement. The level of peak temperature and the speed at which it is reached determines the adaptation needs for infrastructure and natural systems. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) assessed a large number of scenarios and categorized them based on various metrics, including their projected peak temperature, and found a relatively large number (97) of scenarios still limiting warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot, defined as peak temperature below 1.6°C with >50% likelihood. However, the feasibility of these have been questioned, and recent emissions increases from 2020 to 2023 have underscored those doubts.

In addition, since AR6, continued measurements and advances in climate science have led to a downward correction of remaining carbon budgets for a given peak temperature target. Furthermore, the understanding of the feasibility of near-term deployment of different mitigation options has improved with continued deployment (or lack thereof). Studies looking into feasibility aspects have also highlighted the difficulty of fast emissions reductions as part of dedicated climate policies, especially in countries that lack the governance and institutional capabilities to enforce regulation in other policy domains (such as taxation or environmental regulation).

Our study thus explores the feasibility of ambitious peak temperature targets in the Paris Agreement target range, in light of the current state of knowledge, taking into account the observed emissions rebound after the COVID-19 pandemic and the improved understanding of feasibility along five relevant dimensions: geophysical, technological, institutional, socio-cultural and economic.

Using eight state-of-the-art global multi-regional process-based integrated assessment models (IAMs), we explore a set of 20 scenarios, including both the cost-effective settings that dominate the IPCC scenario assessments and scenarios with harmonized variation of explicit feasibility considerations. The choice for this treatment is informed by previous studies and the participating models' capabilities and is not fully comprehensive in the sense that additional variables and aspects could also be assessed. However, we use a more systematic approach than previous studies and also assess the impact with and without regional differentiation, both of which have been identified as crucial missing pieces in previous studies.

We explore the impact of explicit consideration of feasibility constraints on six scenarios that limit peak warming to less than 2°C with more than 66% likelihood (defined as a 1,000 GtCO₂ carbon budget from 2018) and additionally explore the lowest end of achievable peak temperature under variation of feasibility assumptions in 14 additional scenarios. Complementary to other studies looking at the role of short-lived climate forcers or individual energy sectors or technologies, we focus here on total CO₂ emissions and especially on the energy sector. Thus, we only evaluate the warming implication via the link with cumulative CO₂ emissions.

The models used in this analysis do include other greenhouse gases—including methane (CH₄), which is very important for understanding the trajectory of peak temperatures. However, due to the lack of available evidence regarding the levels of CH₄ emissions reductions that are considered feasible and the large differences of representation across models, we limited this analysis to CO₂.

The key innovation beyond existing literature lies in the consideration of the institutional dimension with which we strive to proxy the capacity to effectively implement climate mitigation policies. We justify this key assumption based on past literature that has identified the quality of institutions as an important driver of many climate mitigation policies and the credibility of their implementation. We then operationalized institutional constraints via region-specific limits on both carbon prices and emissions-reduction rates, which are derived as a stylized function of the dynamically projected government effectiveness indicator and historically observed reductions of sulfur dioxide emissions. This constraint is thus region specific and changes over time as the government effectiveness improves.

The logic behind this approach is to explicitly incorporate the most relevant feasibility considerations identified in previous studies, making the scenarios more applicable for real-world interpretation and implementation. In other words, the inclusion of technological and institutional constraints helps scenarios to be closer to the fuzzy feasibility space, allowing them to also have a higher implicit likelihood of being realized (at least based on the assessment of aspects covered). Following recent critiques of the often narrow focus on mitigation costs in IAM studies, we thus explicitly look at scenarios with higher narrowly defined mitigation costs but lower risk of failure. The additional enablers of reduced demand in high-income countries and increased electrification in the combined scenarios create more flexibility on the supply side and thus further improve the feasibility of implementation.

## Table 1. Treatment of five feasibility dimensions taken from IPCC AR6 in this study

| Feasibility dimension | Geophysical | Technological | Institutional | Socio-cultural | Economic |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Scenario name components |  | 'Tech' | 'Institutional' | 'Enablers' |  |
| Use in study | Combined constraint | Combined constraint | Policy design constraints with three subcases (optimistic, default and pessimistic) | Enabling factor via reduced constraint | Result metric |
| Variables | Limit on yearly bioenergy potential; cumulative geological storage of carbon | Growth of CCS, nuclear, solar, wind and gas electricity generation (maximum deployment levels at different time horizons or annual rate of change of market shares) | Regional carbon price differentiation and capping of carbon prices (and capping of emissions reduction in default and pessimistic case) | Behavioural changes reducing energy demand (especially for high-income activities and countries); reduced constraint on electrification | Carbon prices |

# Interaction of different feasibility dimensions

To explore implications of feasibility constraints on the cost and achievability of climate targets, we first explore carbon prices to limit cumulative CO₂ emissions from all sectors from 2018 until the time of net-zero to 1,000 GtCO₂ (this section) and then explore minimum achievable cumulative CO₂ emissions across different feasibility-scenario variants (following section).

The technological constraints do not have a substantial impact in terms of overall difficulty and the relative effort required for reaching an ambitious decarbonization trajectory, which we estimate via the shadow price of carbon. The relative change of the uniform carbon prices is for most models smaller than a factor of two and is also smaller than the difference across models for the same assumptions.

The imposition of the institutional feasibility is assessed first in its default specification of both constrained prices and quantities. This leads to the differentiation of relative effort across regions. Countries with very low governance scores exhibit carbon prices below the cost-effective-scenario level; for the highest-capacity countries, carbon prices increase between a factor 2 and 3 for most models compared with the cost-effective scenario, leading to a shift of regional emissions.

However, combining both the technological and institutional constraints leads to strong increases of carbon prices in high-capacity countries by a factor of 3–4 for most models. This strong nonlinear effect of adding both the technological and institutional constraint can be explained by the increased importance of fast upscaling of all mitigation technologies for the high government effectiveness regions that need to reach net-zero CO₂ earlier in scenarios with institutional constraint. Therefore, the regionalized constraint on solar and wind upscaling is more constraining for faster decarbonizing regions. And even the globally implemented constraints on the crucial technologies carbon capture and storage (CCS) and bioenergy for reaching net zero become more constraining compared with the scenario without institutional constraint, as overall reliance on carbon dioxide removal increases in such scenarios of differentiated speeds.

Dedicated interventions on socio-cultural enablers (for example, the reduction of energy demand for high-income regions and more optimistic assumptions on electrification) substantially reduce CO₂ prices so that in some models even the highest-income regions have lower carbon prices compared with the cost-effective case. Even with the additional technological constraints on the supply side, the combined scenario achieves the target with only a doubling of carbon prices in high-institutional-capacity countries and reduced carbon prices in countries with the lowest governance scores.

Despite the lack of comprehensive global mitigation action and increasing global emissions in the past 15 years, the faster-than-expected technological progress has kept ambitious mitigation feasible at manageable efforts. A comparison of the shadow carbon prices we find here (which measures the marginal cost of abating a ton of CO₂) with the social cost of carbon (which measures the monetized value of avoided damages of such abatement) should not be misinterpreted as a full cost-benefit analysis. Nevertheless, recent literature has put the median social cost of carbon at values between US$150 and US$200 per ton of CO₂ in 2020, with substantially higher means, higher than the 2030 carbon prices in regions with high government effectiveness, and much higher than those with low government effectiveness.

The fact that the combined scenario explicitly considers feasibility constraints implies that such a scenario represents a more plausible pathway towards climate-target achievement than the cost-effective setting that so far has dominated most scenario analyses.

# Lower bound of peak temperatures

If we assume that governance scores remain frozen at their 2020 levels, the ability to rapidly constrain emissions in most regions is sharply curtailed. In such a situation, and combined with technological constraints and the more pessimistic demand-side assumptions, more than 1,000 GtCO₂ would still be emitted before net zero can be reached. With these pessimistic assumptions on feasibility constraints, the maximum allowable policy ambition achieves peak temperature of 2°C only with around 30–50% likelihood.

Keeping the pessimistic frozen institutional constraints but relaxing the technological constraint or assuming faster demand-side transformation helps to lower achievable peak budgets and temperatures, with the models diverging on which effect is larger. The models do agree, however, that the combined relaxation of the technological and socio-economic dimension allows for peak budgets between 750 and 900 GtCO₂, corresponding to 40–55% likelihood of staying below 1.8°C.

Under the default specification of dynamically improving governance scores for the institutional constraint, results are more diverse across models. With the most pessimistic assumptions on technological and socio-cultural constraints, they cluster around 900–1,000 and 550–700 GtCO₂ respectively, which corresponds to either around 40% probability of staying below 1.8°C or around 75%, respectively. With the more optimistic assumptions on technological and/or socio-cultural constraints, the range of likelihood to stay below 1.8°C reaches 50–90%, which corresponds to a 15–50% likelihood of staying below 1.6°C.

Put differently, with these settings, some but not all models still reach the C1 class of scenarios from IPCC AR6 (defined as having >50% likelihood of a peak below 1.6°C).

Even a more optimistic implementation of the institutional constraint, which differentiates carbon prices but does not explicitly constrain emissions reductions, leads to similar results. Not all models have run these scenario variants, but the comparison of scenarios from the same models shows that the effect is slightly larger for scenarios with enablers than for scenarios without. Therefore, all models running scenarios with enablers and this more optimistic institutional constraint achieve scenarios in the C1 class.

For scenarios without any form of institutional constraint, nearly all models achieve C1 compatible scenarios, both with and without additional technological constraints. The exception is the AIM model in which, due to very strong growth of assumed electricity demand to 2030, renewables scale up is not fast enough to allow for the necessary pace of fossil phase out in the electricity sector. Therefore, in scenarios without Tech constraints, this model projects what are probably unrealistically high rates of growth of fossil CCS to 2030 based on the recent track record of those technologies. AIM thus projects a very slow phase out of unabated fossil fuels in electricity generation in the Tech scenario, causing most of the more than 300 Gt CO₂ higher emissions in the Tech scenario compared with the cost-effective scenario.

# Discussion

Our results show that the most ambitious scenarios accounting for the institutional feasibility concern only allow for a likelihood of 5–45% of staying below 1.6°C at peak warming, with considerable differences across models and assumptions around the institutional constraints. The world needs to be prepared for the possibility of an overshoot of the 1.5°C limit by at least one and probably multiple tenths of a degree even under the highest possible ambition. Without much increased near-term climate policy ambition everywhere, and especially without dedicated efforts to improve institutional capacity to enact fast mitigation, in particular in countries with currently low government effectiveness scores, an even higher overshoot will soon become inevitable.

Our study does not imply that the 1.5°C target needs to be abandoned. Rather, it provides a nuanced picture of what needs to happen to peak temperatures at a minimal overshoot above 1.5°C to decrease temperatures afterwards. However, given our focus on improved understanding of near- and medium-term feasibility constraints, we look only at the trajectories until peaking and do not discuss in detail strategies and trade-offs for temperature reductions after the peak.

The analysis does, however, make clear that to bring temperatures down to below 1.5°C after such an overshoot, a substantial amount of several hundreds of GtCO₂ per 0.1°C of overshoot will need to be removed from the atmosphere. Reducing demand and increasing electrification, while not being sufficient alone to avoid overshoot, will be very helpful when it comes to reducing temperatures from such an overshoot, as reduced demand for energy services leaves more energy and materials available for carbon dioxide removal. This is particularly important in the presence of technological, geophysical and institutional constraints limiting the availability of bioenergy and CCS and their viability in certain regions.

Our study provides an innovative addition to the scenario literature in that it explicitly considers harmonized feasibility constraints along various dimensions. The results show that technological constraints are not the most critical concern for mitigation, given the latest acceleration of observed deployment in key mitigation technologies. Enabling factors such as reduced demand, especially in high-income regions, and faster demand-side transformation towards electrification can help to lower the achievable lowest peak temperatures for a given set of assumptions.

The most important dimension studied, however, is the institutional dimension. Our results show that explicit consideration of institutional constraints allows for delineating a plausible, though fuzzy, lower limit of peak temperature increase. The nuanced results show that both the assumptions on the relationship between government effectiveness and feasible mitigation ambition and the built-in model difference have an impact on results.

When looking at scenarios with enablers, it is important to keep in mind that we have not considered the potential economic or political costs of faster technological transformation and reduced demand in high governance regions nor have we considered an explicit feedback of enablers on allowing for faster relaxation of the institutional constraints.

While our work goes beyond existing assessments of feasibility considerations, more work can be done to look at the dynamics between different aspects of feasibility and to link this work with frameworks of probabilistic policy outcomes. Including feasibility assessments of methane abatement will also be important for a more complete understanding of the feasibility of different peak temperatures as will be studies that link the general approach presented here with a scenario set-up based on detailed policy packages instead of generic carbon pricing.

A robust insight from this work, however, is that focusing on cost effectiveness without consideration of institutional feasibility and regional differentiation leads to important biases in benchmark scenarios. Our approach has been to identify scenarios that qualitatively move towards higher feasibility as an important innovation, helping to fill the scenario space and creating a bridge between pure cost-optimal benchmark scenarios and pure bottom-up prospective scenarios.
