# Energy and socioeconomic system transformation through a decade of IPCC-assessed scenarios

D. J. van de Ven, S. Mittal, A. Nikas, G. Xexakis, A. Gambhir, L. Hermwille, P. Fragkos, W. Obergassel, M. Gonzalez-Eguino, F. Filippidou, I. Sognnaes, L. Clarke, G. P. Peters

Charting future emissions pathways is a central tenet of IPCC assessment reports (AR), yet it is unclear how underlying drivers (including around policy and technology) have influenced the evolution of emissions pathways. Here we compare scenarios in AR5 and AR6 and find that scenarios without specific climate policies enforced have shifted lower in each scenario generation, owing to falling low-carbon technology costs and reduced expectations for economic growth, reducing fossil-fuel shares in energy and industry. Mitigation pathways consistent with $1.5–2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ have seen increasing electrification rates and higher shares of variable renewables in electricity in more recent scenario generations, implying reduced reliance on coal, nuclear, bioenergy and carbon capture and storage, reflecting changing costs. Despite the shrinking carbon budget due to insufficient recent climate action, mitigation costs have not increased given more optimistic low-carbon technology cost projections. Moving forward, scenario producers must continually recalibrate to keep abreast of technology, policy and societal developments to remain policy relevant.

The decade in between the Sixth (AR6) and Fifth (AR5) assessment reports of the IPCC has seen dramatic cost reductions and performance improvements in key clean technologies such as solar photovoltaic (PV), battery storage and wind power. However, it has also seen relative stagnation in long-considered mitigation “game-changers”, resulting in concerns over the plausibility of the diffusion scales assumed in modelled mitigation pathways—regarding carbon capture and storage (CCS) or carbon dioxide removal (CDR), particularly bioenergy with CCS (BECCS). The same decade saw the introduction of low-carbon policies and targets that have helped shift away from “baseline” (no-climate-policy) scenarios—alongside increased climate awareness among citizens and disruptive socioeconomic events amidst lingering effects of the Great Recession that include a pandemic, international conflict and large-scale energy crisis.

These developments have had varied implications for climate action, thereby offering useful opportunities to assess the capacity of integrated assessment models (IAMs) to keep up and to understand how the insights emerging from IAM exercises have changed throughout the decade. In this period, the scientific field of IAMs has grown substantially in research output and user interest, driven by increasing dedication to the climate emergency and improvements in computational power. This growth has allowed thousands of scenarios projecting mitigation pathways with predefined emissions or climate targets to be published in the literature, revealing insights on how emission reductions might be prioritized across countries and sectors.

To fully reflect on what can be learnt from recent scenario literature and understand how potential developments onwards can be addressed, it is instructive to assess what scenario database ensembles say about the evolving role of technology and climate policy. Here, we present such analysis comparing all scenarios assessed within the IPCC reporting process spanning the last decades. The analysis of scenario ensembles spanning four IPCC cycles provides a more dynamic overview of progress, allowing tracking of the evolution of baseline projections—as a proxy of climate effort effectiveness, improvements in modelling capacity and trends in low-carbon technoeconomic developments—and, in turn, of the solution space provided by IAMs to achieve predefined climate targets. Finally, we aim to understand how mitigation portfolios have evolved in IAMs and the driving factors behind this evolution.

## Results

We have gathered, compiled and compared data from IAM scenarios included in four online scenario databases. These include AR5 (published in 2014), the Special Report on Global Warming of $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ (SR1.5, 2018) and AR6 (2022), which all benefit from a harmonized reporting template for socioeconomic, energy system, emissions and climate outcomes, thereby allowing systematic comparison of several dimensions of mitigation. We additionally include inputs from the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES), which was used to inform AR3 and AR4. As baseline-only scenarios, SRES are compared exclusively to baseline scenarios across ensembles. All observations throughout this section are “model means”—that is, the mean indicator value from all scenarios of similar climate ambition from the same model—ensuring results are not biased towards specific models with a large number of scenarios in IPCC assessments.

### Evolution of baseline scenarios

Baseline scenarios are an important reference point. First, they are unconstrained by carbon budgets and mostly driven by assumed continuation of current technology, economic and societal trends. Analysing baseline scenarios is therefore important to understand the significance of observed differences in more ambitious scenarios. Second, the transformative potential of a project or political instrument has been argued to correspond to its potential to shift from an assumed business-as-usual (BAU). BAU scenarios should reflect the expected change under socioeconomic assumptions, whereas mitigation scenarios outline more ambitious transformations of sociotechnical and economic systems towards meeting ambitious climate goals.

Baseline scenario projections for $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions from energy and industrial processes (E&IP) in 2030 and 2050 have gradually decreased from SRES towards AR6, reflecting transformation that has gradually happened (for example, due to policy efforts and low-carbon technology deployment in the historical years of models), evolution of modelling assumptions and/or capabilities (for example, relative costs and enhanced model representation of low-carbon technologies) or changes in assumed socioeconomic trajectories. Comparing scenario emissions in 2010 and 2020 with historical values shows that 2010 emissions were generally underestimated and 2020 emissions (2019–2021 average to largely avoid Covid-19 effects) overestimated in all datasets. Older datasets show higher variability, as estimations are further away from model base years, allowing initial differences to increase over time. The improved baseline starting point, even in the absence of strong climate policies, and the clear overestimation of 2020 emissions, is compatible with recent literature pointing to futures of more than $4–5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ end-of-century warming being increasingly unlikely.

Disentangling the 2010–2050 evolution of mean emission pathways of no-climate-policy baselines in Kaya identity components shows how differences in mean E&IP $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions are driven by a combination of causes. Relative to AR5 and AR6, SRES projected significantly higher gross domestic product (GDP) growth, but also stronger decline in energy intensity of GDP and $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ intensity of energy, even in the absence of policy. The baseline emission reduction from AR5 to SR1.5 and AR6 is driven by a combination of all Kaya components, with lower projected GDP growth playing a significant role, being the main driver behind AR5 scenarios overestimating emissions in 2020. Overall, this overestimation of future GDP growth throughout the modelling ensembles may be driven by long-term uncertainty or structural assumptions in projections.

### Evolution of mitigation pathways

When giving IAMs the objective to limit global temperature increase, radiative forcing or cumulative emissions to certain levels, they typically estimate the cost- or welfare-optimal path over time and space towards that level. Nevertheless, model users determine from which year onwards IAMs must look for this path. AR5 scenarios assumed a level of mitigation activity by 2020 that did not eventuate, with the SR1.5–AR6 ensembles therefore deferring the onset of substantive mitigation activities until post-2020. The relatively delayed and higher peak in emissions resulted in deeper required emission cuts in 2050 in SR1.5–AR6 to be compatible with $<1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ warming. A similar but more moderate effect can be observed for $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ pathways, a pattern repeated for every region, confirming that it is a result of models attempting to find the optimal pathway to specified targets, rather than underlying region-specific developments.

In terms of Kaya components, SR1.5 and AR6 include a much more substantial reduction in $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ intensity of energy supply than does AR5, suggesting that these two ensembles rely heavily on supply-side technology innovation to compensate for the lagging mitigation response of the world. This may confirm criticisms of IPCC scenarios often relying on largely unprecedented technological change rather than slower economic growth or demand reduction for reaching climate objectives, although there is also an incremental role for slower economic growth projections (AR6) or faster declining energy intensity of GDP (SR1.5) to make up for this delay relative to AR5. Interestingly, the role of technological carbon removals (such as CCS) slightly decreased from AR5 to AR6, despite higher mitigation pressure.

The sectoral stocktake in mitigation efforts in 2010–2050 shows that the largest absolute contributions come from energy supply (covering all transformation stages—for example, mining, refining and electricity), but additional effort in moving from $2$ to $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ pathways comes mostly from industry, buildings and transport. Across scenario ensembles, there is a shift towards deeper mitigation in end-use sectors towards 2050, post-AR5, both for more modest $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios and more clearly for $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios, reflecting improved model incorporation of end-use technologies (such as electrification and hydrogen in industrial processes, battery-electric vehicles in transportation and electric heat pumps in buildings) and/or the maturity of these technologies post-2015.

The evolution of $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions from energy supply and AFOLU varies less in absolute quantity between scenario databases, but notably these sectors go towards net-negative emissions in SR1.5–AR6, instead of carbon neutrality (AR5). Energy-sector $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions become negative primarily as a result of electricity generation and fuel supply by BECCS, which first must offset residual sectoral emissions before becoming net-negative. Lower residual emissions in electricity generation (for example, more renewables) can facilitate lower emissions in the energy sector even if BECCS use is moderated. AFOLU $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions represent a balance between reforestation, afforestation, deforestation and—depending on model—forestry. There is a trade-off between BECCS and AFOLU because of limited land availability and saturation of AFOLU over time.

### Energy technology mix and macroeconomic costs

Focusing on mitigation scenarios compatible with $2$ or $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$, results indicate gradual evolution of mitigation portfolios. In terms of primary energy mix, coal shares have dropped in more recent ensembles: while coal still played a non-negligible role in deep mitigation scenarios in AR5 (about 10% of primary energy by 2050), its share is below 10% in all $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}/1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios in AR6. Reliance on natural gas was relatively stable among scenarios in AR5 (about 20–25% of primary energy) but decreased in $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios in SR1.5–AR6 (towards about 15%). This drop is probably related to the need for deeper mitigation relative to AR5. Reliance on bioenergy for mitigation is also slightly lower in more recent scenarios, whereas reliance on solar and wind in the most ambitious scenarios increased from about 10–15% (AR5) to about 20–45% of total primary energy demand by 2050 (AR6), in response to rapidly declining technology costs and enhanced model representation of variable renewables (VRE) integration in the electricity system (for example, coupled with batteries).

This effect is related to the electricity mix and the significance of electricity in final energy demand, due to enhanced electrification. For example, the share of renewables in electricity increases from about 40–50% (AR5) to about 60–80% (SR1.5–AR6) by 2050, while nuclear drops from about 15–20% to about 10–15%, probably related to cost escalation and limited political support after the 2012 Fukushima event. The share of electricity in final energy demand increases with deeper mitigation, but the overall level is about 10 percentage points higher in AR6 over AR5, leading to electrification rates of about 50% rather than about 40% for the most ambitious scenarios. Total primary and final energy use, both decreasing with increasing mitigation effort, have not significantly evolved since AR5.

Generally, mitigation scenarios have evolved to depend less on CCS. Comparison of different CCS elements between scenario ensembles is not straightforward because of changes in reporting structure of carbon sequestration, but reliance on CCS-powered fossil electricity significantly decreased from AR5 to SR1.5, staying relatively low but with high model variance in AR6, consistent with reduced reliance on fossil fuels and non-renewable electricity. Nevertheless, the overall role of CDR has not markedly reduced since AR5. While the role of BECCS marginally decreased, there has been a rise in new CDR technologies such as DACCS. This distinction is important: while mitigation has shifted towards renewables, the need for carbon removals has not declined with the need for deeper mitigation in SR1.5–AR6.

SR1.5 scenarios appear to coincide more with AR6 trajectories for nearly all variables. Deeper mitigation requirements compared to AR5 may play a role, but for many variables (coal and nuclear shares, renewable electricity and electrification), the resemblance starts already with $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios, suggesting structural causes such as updated model structures and/or assumptions.

The IPCC has long assessed the literature on macroeconomic implications of reducing emissions and has published both estimates and limitations inherent in long-term macroeconomic projections. Acknowledging methodological issues and differences in how models address the economics of mitigation, we track how assessments of macroeconomic consequences have evolved from AR5 to AR6. For $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios, estimates shifted from reductions of about 2–3% of economic activity (GDP) in AR5 to about 1–2% in AR6. For $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios, differences are smaller, dropping from about 3–5% to about 2–4% of total GDP. Considering deeper mitigation requirements in 2050 in AR6 relative to AR5, lower macroeconomic costs in AR6 suggest a broader suite of mitigation options was available, more optimistic assumptions over future mitigation technology costs, and/or structural changes in IAMs lowering resistance to major shifts in energy systems. These costs do not include climate impacts, and the economic impacts of climate inaction may surpass IAM-reported costs of mitigation.

#### Box 1. The role of technology in evolving mitigation scenarios

Several clean energy technologies have been scaled up significantly over the past decade, with cost reduction and performance improvements unforeseen at this scale in modelled scenarios, which have been gradually implemented in more recent scenarios. The clearest example is solar PV, for which the cost assumption for 2020 was three to six times lower in AR6 than in AR5 (interquartile ranges), and observed costs around 2020 were lower than assumed costs for 2050 in AR5 and SR1.5 scenarios. Similarly, for technologies such as onshore and offshore wind, battery storage, electric vehicles, hydrogen electrolyzers and electric heat pumps, recent cost reductions and/or performance improvements exceeded modelled assumptions in earlier model runs and IPCC reports. Updated representation of cheaper-than-expected low-carbon technologies in models causes projected baseline emissions to be lower, as clean technologies compete against dirty alternatives even in the absence of climate policy, and mitigation technologies to shift with the same mitigation target.

Moreover, representation of end-use sector technologies has been substantially improved from AR5 towards AR6. This evolution opens new opportunities to mitigation and can be expected to continue into future scenario exercises. Recent industry-specific modelling exercises with higher sectoral detail achieve larger emission reductions than IAM scenarios considered in the IPCC cycles assessed here, to the point that some sectors previously considered hard to abate may now have the option of a much steeper mitigation trajectory (for example, iron and steel with electric arc furnaces and hydrogen-based direct reduction of iron). These developments are expected to be reflected in the new generation of IAM scenarios.

#### Box 2. Scenarios from European modelling teams dominate IPCC-assessed scenario database, shaping energy transition patterns

The changing patterns found in the indicators examined were especially accentuated in scenarios developed by organizations from Europe: AR6 scenarios from European organizations had a higher share of solar PV and wind power in electricity generation and primary energy, as well as higher electrification than the rest—and less reliance on nuclear and CCS. These differences were less pronounced in AR5 and SR1.5 and were even reversed for bioenergy. Similar patterns were found by comparing scenarios of different warming levels between European and other organizations, with $2^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ scenarios showing the largest differences.

While European scenario developers were also using lower cost assumptions in AR6 for solar and wind than the rest, technological costs did not seem to be the only reason. Even when controlling for cost assumptions of solar PV and wind power, the share of renewables in primary energy was still statistically significantly higher in scenarios from European organizations than the rest.

European scenario developers have contributed most scenarios to the examined reports (71% in AR6, 75% in SR1.5 and 66% in AR5), so they have a large impact on overall patterns in the IPCC scenario databases. Since their share has not changed markedly from AR5, the evolution observed may be due to increased use of scenario designs exploring higher shares of renewables and/or feasibility concerns.

## Discussion

IAM research has seen an impressive uplift during the past two decades. Combined with consistent scenario reporting, this allows multidimensional tracking of how transformation pathways have evolved. This analysis examines that evolution over the last decade through a detailed analysis of thousands of IAM scenarios in IPCC scenario databases.

Most analysed indicators evolve across scenario ensembles with a clear direction towards increasing electrification rates and higher VRE shares in electricity generation. Simultaneously, the use of nuclear, bioenergy and CCS with fossil energy has declined in more recent scenarios, despite more stringent 2050 targets. Since 2010, remaining carbon budgets have shrunk by about $400\,\mathrm{GtCO}_2$ (about $0.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$), yet the achievability and macroeconomic implications of delivering the same climate target have not markedly changed. One interpretation is that AR5 portrayed ambitious climate action as harder and costlier than more recent calculations. The SR1.5–AR6 scenario ensembles feature more ambitious emissions cuts in energy end-use sectors (industry, buildings and transport), while allowing energy supply and AFOLU to reach net-negative $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ emissions.

The main causes behind differences between scenario ensembles imply lessons for future scenario development. A major driver lies in faster-than-expected reductions in clean technology costs and improved representation of critical end-use technologies (Box 1). Deviations between projected and observed trends in key technologies point to the need for sustained effort to update models. Failures to reflect practicability or plausibility become more significant with declining carbon budgets. Modelling communities should work closely with stakeholders to keep technology assumptions up to date amid rapidly evolving market dynamics. Since CDR levels in mitigation scenarios depend on emission reduction levers in hard-to-abate sectors included in models, such developments may reduce reliance on CDR.

A second cause is political (Box 2): narratives stemming from a European context may be more pro-renewables given rapid roll-out envisioned in the European Green Deal and the EU’s role as a major funder of such studies. The dominance of scenarios from European institutes may explain increased focus on VRE in more recent ensembles, though European narratives may contrast with those from developing economies where mitigation strategies are interwoven with socioeconomic development.

High economic growth projections have historically been used as an argument to delay mitigation, assuming future generations would be more capable of paying for adaptation and/or CDR. Although most scenarios in these ensembles are not based on intergenerational cost-benefit analysis, continuously corrected-down projections for future economic growth may imply reduced innovation potential for breakthroughs and value added of CDR technologies. Such technologies can increase future costs of mitigation (through later action) and adaptation (through temperature overshoot), while involving other risks. The track record of real-world technology costs outperforming forecasts illustrates that poor forecasts of inputs to mitigation scenarios have falsely favoured delayed action.

Despite spectacular cost reductions and deployment of renewables relative to CCS and nuclear, continued increases in renewables’ shares are not certain: grid balancing, social acceptance, mineral supply chains and other constraints may offset continued capital-cost declines. Other trends are also uncertain; although projected mitigation costs have fallen (or, for $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ pathways, largely remained unchanged) with decreasing technology costs more than offsetting shrinking carbon budgets, this balance can only last so long. Especially for $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ pathways, mitigation costs will rise as the remaining carbon budget diminishes and emissions removals become central to staying below this threshold. A clearer trend from AR5 to AR6 is the reduction in coal and gas shares in future primary energy demand in the lowest carbon budget scenarios. This could continue into AR7, but near-term geopolitical developments must be factored in—for example, potential lock-in to LNG infrastructure.

It is likely that the $1.5^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ temperature stabilization goal will be exceeded within the next 5–10 years, dictating a reframing of scenarios and IAMs. Focus may shift towards feasibility, requiring more critical thinking on how technologies may be deployed under different policy and regional contexts. This emphasizes the importance of using multiple streams of evidence when using and interpreting scenarios, such as sectoral and national expertise. Models integrate many assumptions but can also provide a false sense of confidence. The surge of the “net-zero” concept had no role in AR5 and a relatively small role in AR6, but will probably be instrumental towards AR7, conditioning several indicators explored here.

The world now has a multitude of mitigation policies in place and their impact will complicate development of realistic “reference scenarios” in future exercises. Evaluating no-climate-policy baselines is less meaningful at the global level without real-world comparison. Pathways reflecting current policies and/or Nationally Determined Contributions are also hard to evaluate because policy constantly changes. Backcasting scenarios to determine how the world could transform and achieve ambitious climate targets often apply idealized assumptions (for example, globally harmonized carbon prices), increasingly unlikely to be realized. Evaluating scenarios will thus require increasing expert judgement to elicit policy-relevant recommendations.
