# High-income groups disproportionately contribute to climate extremes worldwide

Sarah Schöngart, Zebedee Nicholls, Roman Hoffmann, Setu Pelz, Carl-Friedrich Schleussner

Climate injustice persists as those least responsible often bear the greatest impacts, both between and within countries. Here we show how GHG emissions from consumption and investments attributable to the wealthiest population groups have disproportionately influenced present-day climate change. We link emissions inequality over the period 1990–2020 to regional climate extremes using an emulator-based framework. We find that two-thirds (one-fifth) of warming is attributable to the wealthiest 10% (1%), meaning that individual contributions are 6.5 (20) times the average per capita contribution. For extreme events, the top 10% (1%) contributed 7 (26) times the average to increases in monthly 1-in-100-year heat extremes globally and 6 (17) times more to Amazon droughts. Emissions from the wealthiest 10% in the United States and China led to a two- to threefold increase in heat extremes across vulnerable regions. Quantifying the link between wealth disparities and climate impacts can assist in the discourse on climate equity and justice.

Over the past two decades, extreme events attributable to climate change resulted in an annual average of US$143 billion in damages. How these costs could and should be covered—both between and within countries—is a matter of debate. Central to this debate is the stark disparity between those responsible for emissions and those affected by their impacts. The wealthiest 10% of the global population accounted for nearly half of global emissions in 2019 through private consumption and investments, whereas the poorest 50% accounted for only one-tenth of global emissions. At the same time, regions with low historic emissions and income levels are typically more frequently and severely exposed to climate impacts and have limited resources for adaptation. This cause-and-effect injustice is widely acknowledged, yet a quantification of how emissions inequality translates into unequal accountability for the resulting global temperature levels and extreme climate events is missing. This translation should account for the individual warming contributions of emissions of non-CO₂ GHGs, such as methane (CH₄), given their major role in recent warming.

In this study we combine wealth-based carbon inequality assessments with an emulator-based climate modelling framework to systematically attribute changes in global mean temperature (GMT) levels and grid-cell-level climate extremes to emissions from different wealth groups. We use the Model for the Assessment of the Greenhouse Gas Induced Climate Change (MAGICC), a simple climate model, in conjunction with the Modular Earth System Model Emulator for Monthly Temperature and Precipitation (MESMER-M-TP), a model that is able to generate large ensembles of spatially explicit monthly temperature and precipitation data that closely resemble those of complex Earth system models at a fraction of the cost.

We use attribution science frameworks to link human-induced GHG emissions to changes in the modelled frequency and intensity of extremes. These frameworks were originally developed to attribute changes in total human emissions. Today, they are increasingly applied for source attribution; that is, to quantify the relative contributions of individual emitter groups, such as companies or countries. When attributing impacts among multiple emitters, various approaches exist and serve distinct purposes. Here we assess the changes in the characteristics of monthly extremes but for the emissions attributable to a specific emitter group.

## Inequality in attributed global warming contributions

Our modelling framework depicts natural variability and uncertainty in the global response to emission changes. Unless mentioned otherwise, we provide median results with the 5th–95th confidence intervals in parentheses. All results are statistically significant (established via a one-sample t-tests) unless explicitly marked otherwise. As our database provides only basket emissions, we derived the main results by assuming that emissions for each GHG scale proportionally with the globally aggregated emissions. We explore the sensitivity to this assumption in Supplementary Section 2.

GMT in 2020 is 0.61°C (0.45–0.83°C) higher than in 1990. We found that about 65% (0.40°C (0.27–0.56°C)) of this increase is attributable to the global top 10%, 20% (0.12°C (0.09–0.17°C)) to the top 1% and 8% (0.05°C (0.03–0.07°C)) to the top 0.1%. These warming contributions are higher (by about one-fifth) than the respective group's contributions to aggregated GHG basket emissions, underscoring the importance of non-CO₂ GHGs.

To put these numbers into perspective, we defined a group's equal share as the contribution to warming they would have if their per capita impact matched the global average. Therefore, we scaled the total GMT increase according to the group's share of the global population (for example, the equal share of the global top 10% would be 10% of the full 0.61°C increase). We then derived climate inequality factors (CIFs) as the group's actual contribution to global warming relative to their equal share. CIFs increase from 6.5 for the top 10% to 20 (77) for the top 1% (0.1%), indicating an amplification of climate inequality with increasing wealth.

The full depth of the disproportion in contributions to GMT level becomes tangible when global emissions are rescaled according to the per capita profile of global income groups. If the entire world population had emitted like the bottom 50%, there would have been minimal additional warming since 1990. However, if the entire world population had emitted like the top 10%, 1% or 0.1%, the GMT increase since 1990 would have been 2.9°C, 6.7°C or 12.2°C.

Between 1990 and 2020, emissions from the global top 10% arose primarily in the world's highest emitting countries: the United States, the EU27, China and India. Note that the composition of the global top 10% shifts over time, and while our focus is on wealthy individuals from the world's largest economies, those from smaller (wealthier, as well as less wealthy) countries also contribute disproportionately. Income levels from regional top emitters deviate from their global counterparts: the top 10% and 1% in the United States and the EU27 (India and China) are wealthier (poorer) than the globally wealthiest 10% and 1%.

Attributed GMT shares by regional emitter groups combine within- and between-region inequality. In the United States (EU27), the top 10% contribute 3.1 (2.8) times more to global warming than the average citizen, but 17 (8) times more than the global average. For the United States, the contribution of the top 10% alone exceeds the entire country's equal share. This relative inequality increases with increasing wealth: the top 1% in the United States (EU27) contribute 53 (21) times their equal shares, and the top 0.1% contribute 190 (64) times their equal shares. In China, where the overall CIF is near 1, the top 10%, 1% and 0.1% emit 4, 13 and 50 times their equal shares, showing even greater regional influence from societal elites. Similarly, in India, where the national CIF is 0.3 (implying that the countries per capita average emissions are below the global average), the top 10%, 1% and 0.1% emit 1.2, 4 and 10 times the global average.

## Major disparities in attributable extremes worldwide

We attribute regional increases in the frequency of extremely hot (dry) months, here defined as 1-in-100-year events in a pre-industrial climate, to the emissions of the global top 10%, so throughout this Article extremes or extreme events refer to a month being at least as hot (dry) as the hottest (driest) 1% of months in a pre-industrial climate. We state attribution results as additional event counts over a modelled 100-year period of current climate conditions compared with those in 1990. For example, 10 additional attributable events indicate that a pre-industrial 1-in-100-year event happens an additional 10 times within 100 years, meaning that its probability has increased tenfold.

For heat extremes, changes are most (least) pronounced in August (February), where 11.5 (8.5–15.4) (3.5 (2.4–4.3)) additional events are attributable to the global top 10%. These changes refer to the global median over land that is predominantly located on the Northern Hemisphere. Areas in strongly affected regions, such as the Amazon region, Southeast Asia or central Africa, face months with up to 30-fold increases in probability.

To account for differences in seasonality between the Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere, we assessed heat extremes during the month with peak temperatures. Emissions from 1990–2020 led to a 12.3-fold (9.7–17.9) increase in the probability of heat extremes in the peak temperature month. The top 10% (1%) contribute 7.3 (25.7) times the global average to this. In addition, the intensities of these extremes increased by 0.83°C (0.75–0.97°C) since 1990. Of this increase, 0.55°C (0.50–0.67°C) (0.17°C (0.16–0.21°C)) is attributable to the top 10% (1%), suggesting that their contribution is 6.7 (21.1) times higher than the global average.

Attribution results for meteorological drought extremes strongly depend on region and month, with robust drying found mainly in Central America, the Amazon, the Mediterranean, southern Africa and northern Australia. This is expected, given the considerable intermodel disagreement and large uncertainties in regional precipitation projections. We found the strongest attributable drying trend in the Amazon region in October. Overall, the region faces a threefold increase (1.7–4.2) in extreme probability compared with 1990. The top 10% (1%) contribute 6.1 (16.7) times the global average to this increase. The Amazon region is of global importance, given its uniquely biodiverse system and its major role in the global carbon cycle. Drought events over the past century have already negatively impacted carbon storage in Amazonian rainforests.

Overall, the spatial disparity in attributable changes at the grid-cell-level implies that the regions that disproportionately contribute to the emissions of the top 10% (for example, the EU27 and the United States) face smaller increases than regions that have contributed very little.

The relatively small (attributable) changes over India and parts of China and the simultaneously high intermodel disagreement are worth noting, given that they are inconsistent with the increasing number of climate-related disasters India is already facing. We assume that this is related to the climate effects of air pollution.

## Attributing transboundary impacts of regional emissions

The inequality in warming contributions from affluent groups in high-emitting regions exceeds the inequality in their global counterparts. This disparity also appears at the grid-cell-level: in the global median, emissions from the top 10% (1%) in the United States are associated with 1.3 (1.0–1.8) (0.3 (0.3–0.5)) additional 1-in-100-year heat events during peak temperature months. This impact represents 23 (60) times the global average contribution and about 3 (2) times the relative contribution of the global top 10% (1%).

The increase in extreme heat is unevenly distributed across regions. For example, in heat-affected areas such as the Amazon and southeast Africa, emissions from the top 10% in China (the United States) are linked to 2.7 (1.9–3.2) (2.5 (1.7–2.8)) and 2.7 (1.1–3.4) (2.5 (1.0–3.2)) additional occurrences of extreme heat during months with peak temperatures. In these areas, we can also robustly attribute heat extremes to the regional top 1%. In the Amazon, 0.8 (0.7–1.0) additional heat extremes are attributable to the top 1% in China. This corresponds to an increase in occurrence frequency of 80%.

Attributing changes in extreme events to country-specific wealthy emitter groups becomes increasingly challenging as emitter groups decrease in per capita size, meaning that their cumulative emissions decrease even if their relative emissions contributions increase. Projected temperature distributions are characterized by strong changes in the trend and by consistency across models, allowing robust attribution results even for seemingly small emission amounts, particularly in highly affected regions. The magnitude depends on the definition of extremes, with tail risks seeing the strongest increase. For droughts, the situation is more complex. The SPI-3 signal is dominated by variability and considerable intermodel disagreement, which prevented us from deriving robust attribution results when emissions are small.

## Discussion

This study introduces a framework to link wealth-based emissions to shifts in GMT and to changes in regional monthly heat and meteorological drought extremes. We found that the wealthiest 10% contributed 6.5 times more to global warming than the average, with the top 1% and 0.1% contributing 20 and 76 times more, respectively. For heat, this imbalance is more pronounced at the grid-cell-level: the wealthiest 10% and 1% contributed over 7 and 25 times more than the global average to the increase in frequency of pre-industrial 1-in-100-year heat extremes during months with peak summer temperatures. The warming contributions of the wealthy are associated with considerable transboundary effects—for example, the contributions of the wealthiest 10% within the United States and China led to a two- to threefold increase in heat extremes across vulnerable regions such as the Amazon, Southeast Asia and southeast Africa. The robust attribution of drought signals is more complex. We found the strongest signals in the Amazon region in October, where the emissions of the global top 10% (1%) led to a 2.3-fold (0.8-fold) increase in the frequency of extreme droughts.

Our analysis also underscores the critical role of CH₄ emissions in near-term warming and calls for new research to disentangle income-based emissions at the level of individual gases. Reducing CH₄ emissions in line with Paris Agreement-compatible pathways could yield immediate reductions in global temperatures and climate extremes.

We note that our study focuses on monthly extreme heat (that is, extremely hot months), meaning that heatwaves—defined as prolonged periods of abnormally high temperatures lasting from two days to months—do not directly relate to our metric. However, the probability of extreme daily temperatures is amplified during extremely hot months, implying that attributable results for short-duration heatwaves might be even more pronounced. Further research is needed to explicitly explore this relationship.

Wealth-based emissions comprise private consumption and investment in capital formation across production sectors that supply goods and services consumed by society. Recognizing the associated unequal warming contributions can inform policy interventions. For example, deliberation over a coordinated global wealth tax can draw on this work, illustrating the climate co-benefits of attenuating stark wealth-based disparities in climate impact responsibilities. The transboundary impacts we identify highlight how high-emitting individuals contribute to intensified extremes, even in distant regions. Similarly, the warming attributable to the investments of the wealthy underscores the need to realign financial flows to meet global climate goals. This is particularly relevant for the wealthiest 1% and 0.1%, whose transboundary contributions to worsening local extremes arise primarily through investments, rather than consumption. Efforts to redirect these financial flows should also consider the shared responsibilities of governments to expedite systemic changes in financial and regulatory structures.

Our granular impact analysis shows that low-income regions incur the brunt of the harm caused by emissions concentrated among wealthier populations worldwide. From an adaptation and loss-and-damage perspective, this provides a basis for policy discussions around contributions to compensatory and preventative measures. The amounts of adaptation and loss-and-damage finance provided currently are minuscule compared with the assessed needs. Our work motivates innovative policy instruments targeted at wealthy individuals to bridge these glaring finance gaps. Such policies can also improve perceptions of climate justice, a vital factor in fostering social acceptance of climate action. Moving towards evidence-based and targeted policies that reflect polluter-pays principles, including on the domestic level in terms of individual contributions, may therefore be an important cornerstone to enhance policy support for climate action in general.

Considerations of our results in policy debates must, however, recognize the conceptual challenges and value judgements in our approach and implementation. First, our attribution relies on consumption-based emissions accounting, allocating emissions between consumers and shareholders through shared ownership. Our approach contrasts with production-based approaches used to quantify the responsibilities of producers. Exploring diverse accounting frameworks is key to developing policy mechanisms that address multiple dimensions, but requires care in determining responsibility. Second, we employ the “but for” attribution method. This approach directly links emissions to observed climate change while accounting for the timing of emissions and impacts. However, it is sensitive to the sequence of emissions removal and the design of the counterfactual scenarios. Third, our approach is limited to changes in climate hazards only, and does not account for on-the-ground vulnerabilities and exposure, which are often key to driving the eventual impact of extreme climate events. Integrating other causal drivers into extreme event attribution analysis increasingly allows us to address those limitations in a step towards using extreme event attribution to inform the discourse on loss and damage. At the same time, wealth levels are a key determinant for adaptive capacity and vulnerability in the face of climate change, particularly at the levels of households and individuals. We would therefore expect wealth-related drivers of vulnerability and exposure to further exacerbate the inequalities in responsibilities and experience of the impacts of the climate hazards we studied here.

All quantitative estimates are tied to these three assumptions, and we must recognize the choices and value judgements involved in the analysis when evaluating the ethical and legal implications of our findings.

Our analysis is further limited by the lack of data on how GHG emission compositions vary with income and wealth. This limits the accuracy of our results, given the role of non-CO₂ GHGs in recent warming. In addition, our drought indicator only considers precipitation, which may lead to underestimations in drought risks. Finally, our analysis is based on modelled data, which may deviate from observations.

Accordingly, our analysis does not explicitly assign full responsibility for resulting climate impacts, nor does it determine fair emission levels for any income group. Such determinations require an integrated view of fairness, justice and socio-economic factors, with different reference points for societies at varying levels of development.

## Conclusion

Our findings demonstrate how individual emitter groups have contributed to increases in regional extremes globally. In times of growing economic and climate inequalities, advancing frameworks for attributing emissions to individual emitters can inform global climate action and enhance climate justice.
