# The Environmental Policy Paradox: Why Sustainability Governance is Failing our Planet and What to Do About It (PART II: Main Body)

## 0. Preface

Let me take us back for a moment to March 23, 2006, a day that would turn out to be pivotal in my interdisciplinary journey aimed at uncovering and understanding environmental policy innovations at multiple scales. I was attending the International Studies Association (ISA)'s meeting in San Diego, and spending most of my time engaging with, and going to panels organized by, the ISA's Environmental Studies Section. I had also brought a number of students from Yale's School of the Environment to participate in these deliberations. It was during this particular day that my then doctoral student Kelly Levin and I, perched on a roof top deck overlooking the Pacific ocean on one side, and a lagoon on the other, began pondering some of the big questions facing our planet's environmental governance challenges. Kelly, who had previously earned an undergraduate degree at Yale in ecology and evolutionary biology as well as a masters in environmental management, would go on to champion WRI's climate policy efforts and then become Chief Climate Data Scientist for the Bezos Earth Fund. Our discussion quickly turned to thoughts on the irony of well-intended academics emitting significant amounts of carbon by going to conferences in order to discuss how to lower carbon emissions. We talked about how, if our community of environmental scholars constituted a country, we would immediately be known as one of the highest per capita emitters. Our discussion about how "those wanting to solve the problem were also causing the problem" led me to point out that this was really quite a different dynamic than Rittel and Weber's famous conceptualization of "wicked problems". I blurted out to Kelly that climate change is a "super wicked problem"^1 - a term which would come to characterize a 20 year project sparked by myself, Kelly, my then doctoral student Graeme Auld – now a member of the Canadian national academy and esteemed professor at Carleton University's School of Public Policy and Steven Bernstein –Distinguished Professor of Global Environmental and Sustainability Governance at the University of Toronto- and one of the world's leading environmental constructivist scholars. Our first paper on this project, presented a year later at the ISA's 2007 meeting in Chicago (Levin et al. 2007)^2, called for greater attention to problem features as a way to identify, and justify, forward looking policy analysis. Our widely cited 2012 articles in Policy Sciences on this topic came to play a role in catalysing what is now over a generation of efforts on the part of global and comparative environmental policy and governance scholars to research and identify policy levers capable of triggering effective and durable policy pathways with which to achieve, rather than undermine, clearly specified environmental policy objectives.

This pivotal conversation with Kelly Levin serves as a metaphor for this book and its argument. I had, before this super wicked moment, already devoted considerable attention to interdisciplinary studies, and seeking to advance political science's contribution to cross cutting, problem focused collaborations. These origins go back to Canada's green plan – promoted by conservative prime minister Brian Mulroney who initiated a series of prestigious eco-research doctoral fellowships that I was fortunate to receive – which called for greater collaborations among sustainability researchers with which to generate meaningful and impactful knowledge generation. This was followed by Fulbright year held at Harvard in which I researched trade and environment disputes. I then had the good fortune to sojourn to the University of British Columbia where a business school professor engaging in forest policy and economics, Ilan Vertinsky, engaged me on a study of corporate sustainability initiatives – where I quickly learned about exciting scholarly contributions within disciplines of which I had not been aware. My progressive incremental engagement with problem focused and interdisciplinary work led me to Alabama, where Auburn University's School of Forestry decided to hire me, as a political scientist, for their position in forest policy and economics. I quickly learned about the scientific underpinnings of sustainable forestry, and a range of disciplines from silviculture to dendrology to forest aquatic systems of which I had previously little clue. My pouncing on this knowledge, and bringing much of it to the study of public policy and governance studies – especially the potential of eco-labelling systems to advance sustainable forestry - resulted in a head hunter asking me, in 2000, if I would be interested in giving a talk to Yale's School of Forestry and Environmental Studies. To my delight, they soon offered me a position assistant professor to study forest policy and governance. My interdisciplinary journey was now entrenched as most of my colleagues at Yale were conducting research across the STEM sciences, forest management, water, public health, architecture and, of course, climate. I also had the good fortune to teach a class with then Dean Gus Speth on global environmental governance when I first arrived (Kelly Levin was a student in that class).

I took all of these past experiences and devoted considerable attention to expanding from forests to include climate, as well entrenching that part of my work on public policy and private governance that was devoted to path dependency. I became increasingly curious about not only explaining how path dependency might explain policy outcomes in the past, but how we might harness this knowledge for accelerating climate, forest, and biodiversity policy pathways. This, has, to be sure, been a highly collaborative effort that has involved so many incredibly interesting scholars and practitioners that, try as I might, it will be virtually impossible to list them all here. Nonetheless I will give it a go.

## I. PROBLEMS AND PROBLEM TYPES IN SUSTAINABILITY GOVERNANCE

### 0. Introduction

Dear reader, I would like us to get in a time machine for a moment and travel back to 1992. Let us land in Rio de Janeiro during the time of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) or what would become known simply as the "Rio Earth Summit". It was a special time for a number of reasons. First, it was held 20 years after the "first wave of environmentalism" was punctuated by the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (UNCHE), or what was known as the "Stockholm conference", which sought to coalesce and expand the 1960s and early 1970s proliferation of domestic environmental policies in the US and other developed countries through international initiatives. Second, Rio organizers recognized that global cooperation would require incorporating the diverse set of sustainability challenges faced by developing countries. They did so by generating a thoughtful and lengthy set of sustainability targets – from poverty to health care to education - known as "Agenda 21".

Third, there was widespread recognition that the three interrelated triplet environmental crises of climate, biodiversity, and forests^3 were deemed to be so acute that halting their degradation would require immediate and meaningful international cooperation. This concern was informed by, and drew on, scientific research that showed alarming declines in all three. On the climate front a growing body scientific research (Charney et al. 1979) including a systematic assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) First Assessment Report (FAR)(Houghton, Jenkins, and Ephraums 1990), had wrung alarm bells. The report declared that, without a doubt, carbon dioxide, methane and other gases were creating a "greenhouse" effect that if left unchecked, was projected to dramatically and negatively alter the world's complex ecological systems. Inaction was projected to lead to loss of glaciers, degradation of coral reefs, changes in ocean currents, sea level rise, increases in forest fires and species extinctions. Scientific syntheses also projected exponential ecological impacts for every incremental increase in temperatures above pre-industrial levels. The first assessment's working group II (Tegart, Sheldon, and Griffiths 1990: ii) offered that their report would be "an essential reference for all who are concerned with climate change and its consequences" given that it provided the "scientific foundation" (Tegart, Sheldon, and Griffiths 1990: ii) for the third report (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1990)that which identified "appropriate strategies in response to the issue of climate change" (Tegart, Sheldon, and Griffiths 1990: ii).

Similar alarm bells were run by scientists working on biodiversity loss, including Rachel Carson's (1962) famous calls to action, which was instrumental in catalysing the first wave of environmentalism. By the 1990s the body of scientific evidence documenting the impact of human's on the degradation of nature including alarming loss of biodiversity (IUCN 1980; Wilson 1992), but that continued activities would, by threatening widespread devastation of the structure and function of ecological systems, lead to an era of "mass species extinctions" (Wilson 1988). It was for these reasons that the Brundtland (1985) commission's called for dramatic protection of aquatic and land systems would be reinforced and repeated in a number of global synthesis reports about the perils of inaction (IUCN 1986, 1990; UNEP, IUCN, and WWF 1992).

Likewise scientific research was documenting the rapid decline of forest ecosystems, including tropical forest loss, that threatened to overwhelm the lifeblood of the planet (Persson 1974). Several synthesis global assessments documented the decline of naturally functioning forests including intact old growth forests (WRI, UNEP, and UNDP 1988; FAO 1993). This comprehensive review of forest degradation (FAO and UNEP 1981a; WRI, UNEP, and UNDP 1986) recognized the interrelated components of the triplet crises, since forests structure and function was key to maintaining and promoting biodiversity conservation. For these reasons a number biodiversity assessments to include chapters on forests (e.g. Brundtland 1985: Chapter Six). Many of the scientific reviews of forest ecology included a review of startling tropical deforestation and degradation in tropics (FAO and UNEP 1981b, 1981a) (Poore et al. 1989) leading some reports to be developed to expressly to inform Rio deliberations (e.g.WRI, UNEP, and UNDP 1992)

Fourth - and I know this is going to be hard to believe given the geo-political tensions in 2026 – it was a time when environmental concerns transcended traditional partisan and interest-based politics. Politicians from all stripes – including presidents and prime ministers – would personally signal their support in curbing the impact of humans on the world's fragile biosphere. In symbolic recognition of the need for all of us to transcend our individual and collective self-interests, the leader of the Rio summit was Canadian business leader Maurice Strong who had first made his impact in what was known as the "oil patch" of all things!

It was also very personal moment for me. I had taken a leave from doctoral studies at the University of Toronto to work for the leader of Canada's social democratic party whose recent election was notable for electing Audrey McLaughlin as the first woman to head a major national political party. The pan Canadian approach to environmental problem solving dramatically affected how McLaughlin's team both pressed, but also cooperated with, the Mulroney government. This spirt resulted in the Canadian Conservative environment minister reaching across party lines to invite all of his provincial counterparts to Rio. This meant that my father, who was serving as the environment minister in the Canadian province of British Columbia – and whose government had just initiated policies to protect biodiversity, regulate forest practices, and begin treaty negotiations with First Nations – would join Canada's delegation. This bi-partisan orientation reflected similar environmental politics across the world. As for me, I would return to my PhD program one year later to research the role of environmental groups in policy processes, courtesy of "eco-research doctoral scholarship" that was launched by Brian Mulroney's *Conservative* government. My personal story was also not unique – it was played out in the experiences of tens of 1000s of individuals in countries around the world and within international deliberations who were united in common purpose.

*The purpose of this book is to understand what went wrong.*

How did the world move from, in the early 1990s, collaborative and meaningful efforts to develop and apply impactful environmental policy solutions, to today in which partisan conflicts, weak tools, and the influence of science deniers, have led to widespread frustration about the rapid decline of the world's climate, biodiversity, and forest ecosystems?

*The purpose of this book is also to understand what to do about it.*

My 35 years of research on these questions has made me recognize that the heavy lifting in making some kind of lasting contribution is to engage with other knowledge holders – including those who practice environmental policy solutions. It is only by moving out of our methodological comfort zones that we can, perhaps, find a way to change course.

#### a) The puzzle: acceleration of environmental policy solutions and problems

The puzzle of the exponential increase in environmental policy innovations and climate, biodiversity and forests in particular, along-side their alarming environmental decline is both staggering but also, perhaps, less startling that say a pandemic, because the decline is measured in years and decades rather than seconds and hours. This time dimension – somewhat akin to the frog in the boiled pot – reinforces, rather than reduces, the severity of the environmental crises we now face. This trends makes my review largely an impossible task as it would take volumes to review all of the environmental policies that have been unleashed across multiple levels of governance in public and private spheres.

What I can say is that environmental policy interventions first sparked during the first wave of environmentalism would exponentially increase since Rio (Figure I.0) to address an array of environmental problems from pollution (Shomuyiwa et al. 2023) to land use change. There have literally been since Rio, 1000s of efforts at global, transnational, regional, local and of course national level scales designed to curb environmental degradation of some kind (Mitchell et al. 2020; Mitchell 2003; Biermann et al. 2012; Young 2010).

The UN would seek to catalyze much of these efforts through the use of "high level" meetings and international conferences (Figure I.1), as highlighted by its efforts to encourage countries to sign, at Rio, three conventions for each of the triplet environmental crises. As it would happen, negotiators were successful in achieving framework conventions for climate and biodiversity while failed efforts to do the same for forests led to the creation a year later of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certification program which that introduced "non-state market driven" (NSMD) global governance turned to global supply chains for authority and legitimacy to advance, and seek compliance to, environmental standards (Cashore, Auld, and Newsom 2004c). This model was so innovative, and sparked so much support, that it would be adapted to address almost every critical environmental degradation challenge including climate, fisheries, agriculture practices and even commodity extraction.

<fig>

In the climate case these trends included generating specific policy reforms through hosting yearly climate "conference of the parties" (COPs), which would deliberate over, and witness, the coming into effect of the Kyoto Protocol, including binding targets on "Annex I" countries largely based in the north who had been responsible for the vast majority of carbon sitting in the atmosphere above pre-industrial levels. The Kyoto protocol contained mandatory reduction requirements of Annex I countries based on historical responsibilities. Subsequent climate COP conferences would catalyze agreements on an array of financial and market driven tools from "reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation" sparked at the Bali COP 13, to the "Clean Development Mechanism" (CDM) that allowed northern countries to meet their emissions targets by buying credits from projects in the global south. They also paved the way for the replacement of the Kyoto protocol with the non-binding Paris Accord that focused on "bottom up" local, subnational and national policies, as well as the private sector, as a way to achieve its objectives of limiting warming to no more than 1.5°C and 2 °C above pre-industrial levels.
Disappointments over the effects of financing would lead to yearly efforts to find new ways to seek commitments including the commitments at Glasgow to raise $130 trillion for these efforts (Seymour, Wolosin, and Gray 2022). These efforts were matched by corporate commitments to achieve "net zero" climate emissions (Panwar 2021).

The biodiversity case likewise showed similar trends. Indeed the label itself was then quite new, emerging out of the scientific findings on "diversity" of natural systems (Wilson 1988). While some argued that this had the effect of reducing attention on less heterogenous systems such as boreal ecosystems compared to the tropics, this attention helps place in context the Brundtland Commission's recommendation to protect 12 percent of the world's land and water from extraction. Across the world, there would be an increase in the development and monitoring of "protected areas" (Cook, Lemieux, and Kroner 2024) which, following the International Union of the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), became a key policy intervention to curb extractive practices. At this time the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) punctuated global attention and the UN would also use its meetings – albeit spread two years apart and given less international or media attention than climate – to reinforce existing interventions and create new commitments (IPBES 2024). Likewise, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) which preceded the CBD, would expand to include more listed species. The UN would also draw on these conferences to promote increased commitments and financing to conserve nature, including its 10th COP 2010 non-binding "Aichi Targets" included "halving the rate of habitat loss" (5) protecting 17% of terrestrial and 10% of marine areas (11) preventing extinction of known threatened species (12) and "substantially increasing biodiversity finance" (12) agreements (Li et al. 2023; Buchanan et al. 2020). During the biodiversity COP's 15th meeting in Montreal in 2022 a targets approach would expand its ambition in what is now known as the "Global Biodiversity Framework by producing a "30 by 30" agenda in which countries commit to "Conserve 30% of the world's land, inland waters, coastal areas, and oceans by 2030." It expands traditional protected areas approaches to include "other effective area-based conservation measures" (OECMs). Parallel attention was directed to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), whose jurisdictional framework underpins governance of marine biodiversity and has shaped later deliberations on high seas conservation (Le Prestre 2017).

In the forest case efforts preceding Rio included trade based efforts through the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA) (Gale 1998; Humphreys 2006), international boycott campaigns of produced derived from tropical timber boycotts of tropical timber (El Eris 2000; Brody 1987). Critics that these failed to incorporate environmental objectives explained failed efforts before and at Rio to sign a global forest convention, which instead produced a "non-binding statement of forest principles" and the institutionalization of forest policy deliberations at United Nations under a process now called the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF). Other intergovernmental processes including Montreal and Helsinki "criteria and indicators for responsible forest management" that focused on generating scientific consensus including on what was required to maintain environmental integrity of forest systems. The failure to sign a global forest convention would explain the curious turn to markets for authority sparked by the FSC would gain support from an array of non-governmental, business and even government actors including Greenpeace and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), which were part of broader efforts to generate corporate social responsibility (Auld, Bernstein, and Cashore 2008) or what is today referred to as "environmental social governance" (Hill 2020). These efforts would also turn to develop binding global principles and criteria to shape locally determined standards over which certifiers would audit firms for compliance. Parallel efforts included "environmental management systems" (EMS) that focused on procedures for achieving sustainability outcomes (Kollman and Prakash 2001). However by the 2000s frustration with the pace and scale of change that forest certification supports had hope for (van der Ven, Rothacker, and Cashore 2018) led to strong debates within and across eco-labelling systems about how to better design standards and governance procedures to achieve environmental objectives (Auld and Cashore 2012; van der Ven and Cashore 2018; Judge-Lord, McDermott, and Cashore 2020). It also led many to turn to new problem framing, such as "illegal logging", and new tools including forest legality verification in which forest products would be tracked for their compliance with domestic forest policies (Winkel et al. 2012; Nathan, Hansen, and Cashore 2014; Cashore and Stone 2014; Cashore and Stone 2012). Similar trends occurred in the mid-2000s with the application of public and private "financing" tools through "Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation" (REDD+) initiatives (Kanowski, McDermott, and Cashore 2011) that formally linked forests to the climate convention. The original idea was sparked by scientific evidence that forest degradation and deforestation was contributing to climate change – especially in the tropics (Santilli et al. 2005). The tool itself focused on creating economic incentives to avoid deforestation and manage forests to sequester carbon. Initial supporters engaged in rhetorical causal claims, including the World Bank President asserting that REDD+ "will end deforestation" in the tropics in general, and in Indonesia in particular (World Bank 2011). There was also a strong shift, reflecting climate policies in yet again turning to global supply chains to support "deforestation free" products (Ou et al. 2021).

Taken together, the evidence is clear: a myriad of transnational, local and private governance efforts initiated to manage and ameliorate the triplet environmental crises of climate, biodiversity and forest governance that Rio targeted as critical, and the countless high level conferences and meetings, workshops, that are held each year in service of creating new commitments that have coincided with ongoing tragic and rapid environmental declines (Figures I.1-6). The result is that with every passing year, the urgency of action to avoid catastrophe exponentially increases (Figure 1.3 &5), projections of which are matched by rhetorical flourishes among sustainability leaders (Gayle 2025), but not by effective policy responses.

<fig>

To be sure, these trends have been widely documented and lamented almost every year since Rio by scholars, practitioners and environmental journalists. For example, example climate scientist Hansen (2015) was deeply sceptical of positive assessments of the Paris Accord, such as Victor's assessment about "why it worked" (Victor 2015) and declarations from its head, Christine Figueras, about how her efforts sparked transformative change (Figueres 2016). Such themes were also reinforced by scholars who, caught up on the euphoria, would declare Paris as "The most important climate agreement in history" because it " represents the commitment of the nations of the world to address and curb climate change" (Klein et al. 2017). Hansen, who had witnessed such declarations many times before, even when the Kyoto protocol had binding commitments, assessed the agreement as was "…a fraud really, a fake…. [j]ust worthless words" (Hansen 2016). As time unfolded to reveal increased emissions the UN would continually make statements about the accelerating crisis, such as UN Secretary General António Guterres declaring in 2021 that "We are coming to a point of no return" (Milman 2021) as the world breached the 1.5 °C aspirational objectives.

Certainly, Figueres (2020) and others would deliberate over lack of expected progressing, declaring to countries climate representatives in 2020 that the lessons from Paris – and presumably its missing ingredient - was the need to "set your minds to reaching net-zero emissions" which would then create the conditions to "forge the future we need" (Figueres 2020). As Hansen expected such declarations had little effect and by 2025's climate COP, projections were that not only would Paris' agreed 2 °C ceiling be overshot, but that the planet was soon to surpass 2.5 above pre-industrial levels, which would be expected to, exponentially increase ecological catastrophes including melting of glaciers, damage of coral reefs, altering weather patterns, and unleash habitat loss at unparalleled levels (Gayle 2025). Recognition of these trends would lead one environmental group officials, like their predecessors every years since Rio, to declare the missing ingredient was "a lack of urgency" (Gayle 2025). Meanwhile political scientists working within the Stockholm Resilience Centre would generalize from research findings to focus on implementation as a key challenge (e.g. Norström et al. 2014), that would reinforce their interpretations of, and what to do about, the latest Climate Cop meetings: "The Cop process *has delivered what it was designed for*: diplomacy and consensus" [italics added]"…but the world has moved into the implementation decade, and here the Cop is lagging badly" (Gayle 2025). In response to ongoing warming since Paris, Figueres, with colleagues, would revise her assessment, asserting that negotiations during the Brazil 2025 Cop were a "staggering betrayal" that is "no longer fit for purpose" (ibid). But what is clear from this review of climate, forests and biodiversity loss that if global efforts are to be measured by their ability to achieve outcomes, that not only were they never, as Hansen rightly projected, "fit for purpose". Instead, our focus needs to shift to unpacking an ability to contemplate these highly anticipated outcomes until too late – which goes to the heart of the paradox between environmental policy innovations and massive decline of the problems for which they were created. ^4

Figueres' shift in assessing the Paris Accord's impacts is also metaphorical for the countless similar after the fact recognitions that events did not unfold as hoped or expected. These processes in turn, have produced a second phenomenon: i.e. generating "lessons learned" exercise in the quest to produce "this time" effective results. For example, after 30 years of applying funding strategies of civil society, corporate sustainability, private governance and even scholars, the funding consortium known as the "Climate and Land Use Alliance" (CLUA) declared in 2025 that "this time" – in comparison with their countless efforts of the last 30 years – that they finally "got it right" about how to engage local Indigenous communities to advance climate, biodiversity and forest agendas (Johnson 2025).

Often these efforts to improve policy design right reinforce their quest by calling for "evidence-based" research (Tombe 2018) and "data driven" answers (Maffei, Leoni, and Villari 2020) to better design, implement, "tip the scales" (Lenton et al. 2023; OECD 2022; Schmitz 2006), "scale up" (Hepburn and Stern 2008) and catalyze (Hale 2020) effective or influential transnational policy pathways (Bernstein and Cashore 2012). Yet the history of the last 35 y ears was that they coincided with, and hence appeared to reinforce, the environmental policy paradox.

<fig>

Yet as the future unfolded to reveal future evidence that differed from causal expectations, sustainability scholars and practitioners have responded by "doubling down" on, rather than eschewing, extant epistemologies (Sewerin, Cashore, and Howlett 2022; Howlett and Mukherjee 2018a) in their elusive quest to better design, and implement (Ivanova and Escobar-Pemberthy 2020) policy interventions. These patterns help place in context why 17 years after the World Bank's Zoellick (2007) incorrectly declared, that the 2007 Bali COP's turn to forest focused climate finance was a "transformative" moment that "*will reduce deforestation and forest degradation*", Mark Carney would proclaim, as leader of UN Glasgow public-private finance initiative (GFANZ), that as of 2022 there was finally enough climate finance committed to effectively managing the climate crisis (Carney 2021a). Yet just four short years later the coalition's business wing would fold.^5 It may also explain why policy designers have, in recent years, exclaimed that, unlike the myriad of post 2007 REDD+ initiatives, "this time" they have finally figured out how to create meaningful carbon credits (Greenfield 2023; Verra 2023b, 2023a), engage Indigenous communities to pursue an environmental agenda (Yeung 2023), and to accelerate decarbonization though technological innovations (McKibben 2025).

The elephant in the room is that every year since Rio there have been countless such proclamations that either overexaggerate, and/or are inconsistent with future evidence. It also captures historical moments few remember, such as Al Gore's championing of the much-heralded Chicago Climate Exchange that was designed in 2002 to offer efficient ways to meeting emission reduction targets between US customers and carbon offset projects in Brazil that had, by 2008, collapsed. It also places in context Biden's much heralded as "transformative" climate legislation, much of which would soon be repealed by the Trump administration (Muir and Smyth 2025), and how backward looking research on British Columbia's carbon tax generated lessons about why it "worked" (Porter 2016) was inconsistent with, and not able to explain a future in which, just nine years later, in which BC government would, following Carney's first act as the Canadian Prime Minister abolishing the national climate tax and EV mandates, follow suit (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 2025b). This elephant also helps put in perspective the decline in support and interest of the much heralded private sector "science based targets initiative" (SBTI)(Khan 2024) that had been designed to draw on technology and finance innovations (Clancy 2020a), supported and promoted by the likes of Al Gore and the Bezos Earth Fund, and more recently climate activist McKibben (2025)with which to help meet the Paris Accord's 1.5 & 2°C objectives.

To be absolutely sure, the same Cop meeting produced proclamations, just as had every one since the first in in 1995, that a growing number of states and organizations finally recognized the urgency and escalating threats of inaction (Milman and Carrington 2025). As the director of the International Climate Politics Hub noted: "It's clear that a growing group won't leave Belém without an ambitious package deal built on four cornerstones: money for adaptation, better quality and accountability for climate finance, a clear focus on tackling the biggest sources of climate pollution – fossil fuels and deforestation…" and that the issue is no longer commitment bu whether "the Brazil presidency will choose to listen to them, with time running out (Harvey 2025). The same Cop meeting also produced, as had every preceding Cop, the results of extensive policy analysis into required actions to reduce emissions. In one example, the leader of Climate Analytics declared that their latest policy analysis gave hope to the world with its finding that if renewables, energy efficiency and methane commitments were met "it would be a gamechanger" that could avoid "climate breakdown" by limiting warming to 1.7 instead of the projected 2.6(Harvey and Watts 2025). My point is not that these statements and declarations were made with a straight face given almost verbatim statements have been made in every Cop over the last 20 years. Rather more startling is the strong causal belief that by making such statements they will cause "game changing" outcomes.

All of this may place in context why, in 2025, Bill Gates stunned climate focused scholars and practitioners (Gabbatt 2025) by declaring that he found "a new way to look at the problem" (Gates 2025). After years of work and funding on these issues he claims to have discovered that emissions and warming were not the appropriate measures to address the climate crisis, that humanity was not in peril, and that the 2025 Cop Belém Brazil was "a chance to refocus" the climate crisis on improving human welfare, rather than being justified to act based on the environmental degradation humans have caused (Gabbatt 2025). He declared that, contrary to evidence of and projections of the effects of accumulating emissions (IPCC 2023, 2018) "climate change is serious, but we've made great progress" advancing the normative position the "it's time to put human welfare at the center of our climate strategies" (Gates 2025) as if this isn't precisely what had been occurring, as this book demonstrates, in global and local climate politics for the last three decades. He justified his pivot by saying the actual task was to help "people stay resilient in the face of climate change and that "I didn't pick that position because everybody agrees with it – it's I think intellectually the right answer" (Subin and Corba 2025).

#### b) Explanations

I argue that existing theories relevant for unravelling this paradox are either important but insufficient, or misplaced.

##### i. Orthodox: economic globalization, power and weak implementation

**The economic globalization hypothesis**

*H: efforts to attract global capital has placed downward pressure on environmental standards and regulations*

The first overarching explanation is that economic globalization – i.e. individuals country's increasing reliance on trade, capital, and investment place pressures on governments to enact stringent environmental protections because doing so risks capital going elsewhere for higher returns (Bernstein and Cashore 2012, 2000). This argument turns to several reinforcing phenomenon that reproduced these effects. The first turns to post-World War II "Washington consensus" (Babb 2013) that liberalized trade will not only accelerate growth but that it will also produce, owing to mutual interdependence a "peace dividend" as countries, companies and international organizations recognize the importance of cooperation to maintain these benefits. Critics point out that while neo-liberalism certain has coincided with economic growth, it can cause, if left unchecked, social dislocation and environmental degradation (Speth 2003; Held 2004). The rational is not only the effects of economic activity but the incentives to relax regulations to address global capital – a phenomenon refers to as the "Delaware effect" (Vogel 1997). Ironically similar downward dynamics are also at play by policies advocated during Trump's second term to attract foreign capital through increasing protectionist policies – i.e. replacing the neo-liberalism growth model with another effort to accomplish the same outcome.

To be sure, the economic globalization model performs well in explaining many cases of ratcheting down of environmental standards, such as (Dauvergne's (2001) historical analysis of the role of Japanese firms in shaping Indonesia's rapid deforestation during the Suharto regime. However, while economic globalization has certainly been used as a rationale for reducing environmental regulation in order to attract capital, but it, alone, cannot fully explain the paradox because we do see, in many cases, the adoption of effective environmental policies and regulations that occurred as economies were simultaneously growing and expanding their commerce – a phenomenon Vogel (1997)labels the "California effect" which as I show in Part III, almost always involves coalitions of businesses who, operating in jurisdictions with relatively strong environmental policies and regulations, align with environmental activists to increase environmental standards on their less regulated competitors – either through transnational (Cashore and Stone 2014) or international trade or environment agreements, or increasingly through non-state market driven (NSMD) innovations. Hence while important and complementary to my argument, this hypothesis is insufficient to fully explain the policy paradox.

**The power hypothesis**

*H: individuals, organizations, and classes, including businesses and economic actors actively engage to shape, and constrain, environmental policy and regulations consistent with their interests*

Power is most certainly relevant as a great number of masterful accounts have shown that operate through overt (Lindblom 1977), covert (Bachrach and Baratz 1962) and latent (Lukes 1974; Herman and Chomsky 1988) ways to shape or minimize environmental regulations and policies at multiple levels (Gramsci 2020). There explanation is, to be sure, supported by political science theories on the role of global social structures and mechanisms of class reproduction in not only narrowing policy options, but also in shaping societal and government conception of

According to a great number of scholars operating in this explanation the environmental policy paradox can be understood to be owing to the role of power organizations – especially but not limited to – business interests who seek to control and narrow the development, and deployment of environmental regulations that are either innocuous to them, or may improve their competitive advantage. This group would therefore look to the role of corporations and their associations in focusing climate, biodiversity and forests (Panwar et al. 2023) conversations to those that focus on creating a "business case" for action rather than problem solving per se (Busch et al. 2024). There, is, to be sure, much evidence supporting this hypothesis. After all, business interests and their association immediately moved after the creation of the FSC (Cashore, Auld, and Newsom 2004c) to promote business friendly competitors (Cashore, Auld, and Newsom 2004b)that have fewer and weaker standards, and or championed Type 1 efforts that were expected to reinforce firm profits over Type 4 constraints (Judge-Lord, McDermott, and Cashore 2020). Likewise many have found post 2007 Bali Cop efforts to generate financing for forests as a way to produce carbon credits entice profit maximizing firms at the expense of on the ground outcomes (Nerlich and Koteyko 2010). Likewise Levy and Newell have demonstrated on the role of firm in shaping international environmental agreements in general (Levy and Newell 2005b; Clapp 2005, 2004) while there have been a number of sector specific projects including Humphreys' (2006) account of global forest politics and Gale's (1998) research on the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA), both of which found corporate interest working to marginalize environmental groups over extractive interests in advancing and shaping trade based sustainability efforts. Similar accounts have been applied to assess climate deliberations (Levy and Newell 2005a) and agricultural policies (Clapp 2025) and fisheries (Ponte 2008)Vandergeest. Likewise a great deal of research has found, or posited, that powerful organizations from the World Bank (Marschinski and Behrle 2009) to Philanthropic foundations (Bartley 2007a)deploy their resources in ways that emphasize market incentives over, rather than in service of, environmental impacts.

These accounts certainly have strong explanatory power: the idea that powerful interests would work to steer the myriads of global environmental efforts to those that are either relatively benign to capital, and/or emphasize market and financial incentives as a prerequisite to achieve environmental outcomes, certainly helps account for the puzzle.

However, there are three reasons why this account is incomplete. First, as I will show in the second half of this book, there are many cases in which business did not dominate or control the policy decisions. Hence economic globalization explanations cannot help explaining variation across time or across cases. Something else is going on. Second, and related, there have been, as my historical account in the next chapter reveals, a great number of business interests who have championed policies that went beyond their short-term concerns – from those who helped created the UN Global Compact to the Forest Stewardship Council that included the objectives to halt deforestation. Let us not forget that US Republican politicians in the late 1960s and early 1970s supported the Endangered Species Act, the Clean Air Act, and even overrode Nixon's veto to support the Clean Water Act. And as reviewed above, in the early 1990s politicians from conservative parties around the world who relied on business support were calling for meaningful environmental reforms. In fact, I have witnessed time and time again business leaders – such as then President of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCS) Bjorn Stigson give impassioned reflections at the 2005 TERI New Dehli summit on climate and again at Yale's Environment school following 2009-10 efforts by the Obama administration to advance modest climate policy reforms about the need for swift action. He left little doubt that he, and other business leaders, cared deeply about climate as an environmental crisis. In other words he represented and voice meaningful rhetorical concerns among sustainability policy and governance practitioners that cannot be reduced to some kind of Machiavellian plot to feign interest as a way to avoid meaningful action – even if that was the ultimate result. Third, and related – as I will show in Chapter Seven, sometimes, depending on policy designs, forward looking firms do participate in, and think about, how to ratcheting up of environmental policies qua environmental policies by seeking to generate effective institutional policy and governance solutions for doing so (Panwar 2025). To be sure, they still seek to create the conditions for profit maximizing behaviour and hence health skepticism must always be present, but it does appear that some firms engage without seeming to undermine or sidestep environmental problems. Simply dismissing these efforts would make it difficult to identify and generate the necessary problem-oriented communities, as I discuss in Part II, for identifying and deploying the conditions through which economic globalization might ratchet up rather than down (Barnett et al. 2021). Hence, by itself the economic globalization hypothesis is important, but incomplete.

**The policy design/implementation hypothesis**

*H: weak policy design and enforcement capacities undermines an ability to implement desired environmental policy objectives*

A second group largely made up of scholars of public policy, public administration and business administration turn to research on weak policy design (Peters et al. 2018; Gunningham, Grabosky, and Sinclair 1998) and implementation capacities (Goyal, Pattyn, and Demircioglu 2025; Sabatier 1986; Mazmanian and Sabatier 1983). According to this group, previous policies that were not effective were the result, at least in part, of poor policy design/and or implementation (Fransen et al. 2023; Heyes 2000; Kill 2019; Kanowski, McDermott, and Cashore 2011; Ivanova and Escobar-Pemberthy 2020; Wang and Wiser 2002; Le Prestre 2017; Armstrong and Gunton 1995; Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity 2003; Gavrilut et al. 2015; Ackerknecht et al. 2005; UNFF 2002; Norström et al. 2014). Hence, the solution that this group of scholars and practitioners take is to either redesign ineffective policies and/or create new interventions based on "lessons learned" from previous experiments (Nair and Howlett 2015; Hoffmann 2011; Sabel and Zeitlin 2008; Overdevest and Zeitlin 2016). Certainly this group of scholars is very important for generating insights about how governments and private actors might think of capacities (Sabatier 1986; Mazmanian and Sabatier 1983) and approaches with to help governments achieve their policy objectives (Demircioglu and Audretsch 2024).

However I argue that the weak policy design capacity/weak implementation hypothesis is misplaced. In fact, believe that this explained the paradox has led to 35 years of concerted efforts to improve policy and governance capacity and financing for implementation, which has only served to produce an exponential number of policy innovations that are, themselves, unable to ameliorate the environmental problems for which they were created. In other words, those who hold the causal hypothesis that better policy design and implementation will "this time" make a difference actually o account for the proliferation of policy innovation and fragmentation at multiple levels hence reinforcing, rather resolving on their own, the policy paradox (Chan et al. 2025). We need to look no further than how this community's call to promote policy coherence over the last 15 years worked to reinforce the fragmented systems of global environmental policy innovations their work helped reinforce, rather than addressing the pathology that led to the proliferations in the first place (Nilsson and Weitz 2019a; Elmore et al. 2014; Lissack and Letiche 2010).

##### i. Unorthodox: ill fit for purpose problem conceptions

The argument in this book demonstrates that the first two hypotheses are useful but insufficient, while the third is misplaced – serving to, ironically, unconsciously and effectively reinforce Type 3, 2 and 1 conceptions while drifting away from Type 4 policy design capacities. A more complete understanding of environmental policy paradox is that policy analysts and advocates have, often unconsciously, generated "ill fit for purpose" problem conceptions that have made it impossible to conceive of, let alone deploy, interventions for effective environmental outcomes. Failure to recognize this bias means that like Charlie Brown and Lucy and the football, sustainability policy and governance scholars and practitioners keep trying the same thing with the same results. Only this game has lasted 35 years and counting.

**The argument: four types of problems, not one**

I argue that to understand why this paradox persists is to recognize that there are not one, but four kinds of sustainability policy challenges (Cashore and Bernstein 2022; Cashore et al. 2024; Cashore et al. 2019b). These are distinguished on two dimensions: does the analysis produce conclusions and theories that: 1) treat individuals, organizations and states as largely self-interested, satisfaction driven entities that seek some kind "utility enhancing" outcome?; 2) are generated from, and narrowed to, understanding, improving, or solving, a clearly specified and measurable "on the ground" problem or class of problems? (Cashore et al. 2019b; Cashore and Bernstein 2022).

> Table I.0: Four Problem Types

| Type | Problem solving dominates? | Utility dominates? |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| **TYPE 1** | **YES** | **YES** |
| **TYPE 4** | **YES** | **NO** |
| **TYPE 2** | **NO** | **YES** |
| **TYPE 3** | **NO** | **NO** |

These distinctions, in turn, leads to the conceptual and empirical discovery of four schools of sustainability policy thought and practice reinforce one of the four resulting problem types (Table 1). The Commons school (Type 1 reinforcing) largely views the environment degradation as a collective action problem that undermines long-term resource use (Ostrom 1990, 2003). The Optimization school (Type 2 reinforcing) views the environment through the lens of some kind pre-existing preferences – the most dominant and recognized strand is practice by self "environmental economists" - who incorporate, and convert, current and future environmental "externalities" (Stern 2006; Ocko et al. 2017) into utility enhancing equivalents (Thomas and Chindarkar 2019) as a means to champion aggregate utility seeking cost-benefit analysis. Another strand includes neo-realist and neo-liberal institutionalist theorists within International Relations who are motivated to uncover, and offer solutions consistent with, state preferences (Keohane 1984). The Compromise school (Type 3 reinforcing) emphasizes deliberative governance that integrate a variety of interests, values and organizations as a way to achieve legitimate and trustworthy outcomes (Bernstein 2001). The Prioritization school (Type 4 reinforcing) seeks to generate policy solutions that are granted higher lexical status than other problems (Tribe 1972).

Each has sophisticated methods and prescriptive projects whose origins can be traced to highly ethical obligations about how to view problems facing the world, how to measure them, and how to identify effective solutions. The Commons school emerged to avert commons tragedies that threatened local communities with collapse of their resource dependent livelihoods. The Optimization school emerged as a way to enhance aggregate utility outcomes in order to create income streams to alleviate poverty, access health care, maintain food security and, when it came to state cooperation, produce interconnected institutions and markets that would realize each country's long-term interest in generating peace and prosperity. The Compromise school emerged as a way to balance competing interests in a manner that would produce legitimate procedures that would reduce conflict and promote consensus-oriented governance. The Prioritization school emerged to address and reduce the whack-a-mole excesses of utility outcomes such as treating the eradication of slavery, colonialism, and more recently Covid-19, as outcomes that must be achieve "no matter what" – irrespective as to whether they would or would not undermine consensus or utility considerations.

*Birds and moles:* while their methods are often offered as a value neutral "evidence based" and "data driven" way to produce knowledge to inform policy decisions, they actually reinforced hidden an "unconscious bias" that biased one problem type over the other. All four schools produce unintended side effects on a range of other policy challenges in both synergistic or negative ways: i.e. they either "kill two birds with one stone" or they create "whack-a-mole effect" that create additional policy headaches. (For these reasons for shorthand in this book I identify the former as "birds" and the latter as "moles").

*Synergies bias:* the Compromise and Optimization – and to a lesser degree the Commons school – suffer from a "synergies bias". That is, they are much more tuned to identifying, managing, and even asserting the prevalence of birds, making them relatively blind to seeing the far greater number of moles. In contrast the Prioritization school recognizes and emphasizes moles as part of its DNA: i.e. it fosters an analytical technique that begins, and ends, with lexical ordering. This means that its adherents develop solutions for higher ranked problems that cannot be undermined by efforts to address second order moles subsequently. To be sure, while there are sometimes cases in which policies can be designed to create Type 3, 2 and 1 synergies, the dominance of the Compromise, Optimization and Commons schools means we are now in strange world in which achieving Type 4 outcomes is dependent on finding them to be synergistic with Type 3, 2 and 1 outcomes.

*The overexaggeration of synergies, and minimal attention to, or disbelief in widespread moles, explains then the tragic paradox of Type 3, 2 and 1 policy innovations being developed to manage Type 4 problems.*

<fig>

While all are ethically motivated, the Prioritization school is the only one "fit for purpose" to manage climate, biodiversity and forest crises because the others either consider Type 1 utility enhancing resource extraction that almost always create a Type 4 mole of some kind, while Type 2 and 3 considerations of not only how, but whether, the Type 4 problem can be effectively managed. In other words, the Commons, Optimizations and Compromise schools produced Type 3, 2 and 1 policy interventions that are "ill fit for purpose" to address Type 4 "environmental climate, biodiversity and forest crises.

In other words, debates about methods – reinforced by "evidence-based" and "data-driven" metaphors - have become so prominent, and each school defined by them, that we have largely lost sight of the competing ethical obligations that produced the methodological biases in the first place. I further argue that over time, the Prioritization school has become so marginalized vis-à-vis the Commons, Optimization and Compromise schools that most sustainability scholarly and practitioner policy networks have lost the capacity to think about, yet alone develop policy interventions consistent with, Type 4 problems. These patterns I show, reproduced over several iterations an "policy creation euphoria, implementation depression" cycle in global climate, biodiversity and forest governance that continues to this day.

I further argue that the masquerading of underlying ethical motivations as objective methods has occurred so slowly and subtly over time, and diffused across scholarship, practice and policy design, that it has largely gone unnoticed let alone systematically explored - like the proverbial frog in the boiling water. This trend captures the shift from the 1970s when the Type 4 reinforcing Prioritization school was dominant in strongly shaping the content of the US Endangered Species Act, Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act and National Forest Management Act (Speth 2004) and that helped shape the Creation of the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) (Ivanova 2021b) to today when Commons, Optimization and Compromise Schools are most dominant within local, domestic and global networks and organizations.

I argue that this powerful but subtle shift has been facilitated by elite approaches to elite professional environmental management schools in general, and those in the US who tend to produce the majority of global elite sustainability practitioners, have been influence by, and reinforce the drift away from the Prioritization school towards Commons, Optimization and Compromise orientations. This shift, in turn, leads to a cadre of Type 3, 2 and 1 trained experts who, then hired in domestic, transnational and global bodies, assess the world, and conduct policy analysis and practice consistent with their methodological training, including how to think about what it means to be effective. As a result, and in contrast to 1972, those who develop Type 4 frames are often, again often unconsciously, marginalized or dismissed as either "radical" or "difficult". In other words, one reason this kind of argument has rarely been developed, let alone assessed, is that doing so carries enormous professional and personal risks given the hegemony of the compromise and optimization schools within professional training programs and these practitioner networks. The result has been a multifaceted drift away from Type 4 produce by multiple causal tentacles. Including reinforcing processes across epistemology, pedagogy, professional networks, technocratic norms, and governance practice. It is precisely because these influences interact — often subtly and unconsciously — that the paradox has both persisted and gone largely unnoticed for decades.

<fig>

In sum, I theorize a relationship in which sustainability policy and governance scholars drift away from Type 4 influences pedagogical and training decisions within professional environmental programs which then results in unconscious bias in graduates who are often hired in global and transnational environmental organizations (Figure I.8). These occur through many kinds of interrelated but distinct tentacles, such as reproduction of a scholar-practitioner "good sustainability governance norm complex" that teaches and researches synergies across all kinds of sustainability outcomes and formally treats Type 4 whack-a-mole effects, incorrectly, as Type 3, 2 and 1 design challenges. Likewise the vast majority of post program evaluations of success and ineffectiveness draw on techniques from the Compromise and Optimization schools, with almost no training in, or capacity, to engage in Type 4 program evaluation.

*It is this failure to be explicit about these different approaches to, and effects of, their whack-a-mole outcomes, helps explain the disconnect between Type 3, 2 and 1 scholarly and practitioner efforts to address Type 4 environmental problems in general, and climate, biodiversity and forests in particular.*

The relative influence of Commons, Optimization, and Compromise schools has meant the squeezing out of the Prioritization school, resulting in the decline of Type 4 policy design capacities. Without understanding and overcoming these biases the more we risk undermining the production of creative and analytical thinking necessary for imagining polices that have yet to be deployed and anticipating futures that have yet to occur (Morrison 2022; Capano and Pavan 2019; Peters et al. 2018). In other words, uncovering these differences is profoundly important if we are to promote "fit for purpose" analytical frameworks capable of identifying effective solutions for ameliorating the ecological effects of climate change, species extinctions, and, forest decline. This argument, in turn, paves the way for the third part of this book: how to bring Type 4 policy design capacities "back in" in order to nurture, and apply designs lessons that emerge, from Prioritization school policy analytics.

#### c) Assessing the argument

If my multi-causal argument has merit – and the evidence in this book shows overwhelming evidence that it does – it also means that fully documenting and assessing the multiple causal tentacles would take a lifetime which is why, ironically, this phenomenon has gone largely missed. However, and for the same reasons, research can be undertaken to assess whether the argument not only has merit, but shows strong evidence, by focusing on critical indicator outcomes where, if my argument was correct, the empirical bias I assert would need to be present.
This means that the first and most important step to assess whether the argument has validity is to conduct research on critical indicators that would need to and identify a host of range of critical indicators that would need to be consistent with the argument: i.e. that approaches to, and relevant changes of, sustainability outcomes, scholarship, and practice would need to reflect Type 3, 2 and 1 biases over Type 4 conceptions. This second and related step would then be to, as Part II undertakes, to reviews empirically evidence of the veracity of my argument. This effort not only provides overwhelming evidence consistent with my argument, but justifies Part III's focus on building Type 4 policy design capacities.

##### i. Research design and methods

If this argument is right, it carries profound implications for greatly expanding how to think about and measure explanations for the environmental policy paradox. It also confront longstanding debates about the merits of qualitative and quantitative research in the social sciences, solutions of which have arguably made it impossible for most to conceptualize, let alone empirically identify, the multiple empirical and causal tentacles that have led to largely unconscious "ill-fit for purpose" Type 3, 2 and 1 policy interventions for ameliorating Type 4 problems. Let me say that an ability to answer this question confronts almost every test book in the social sciences on research design and methods required which – though distinguished by quantitative and qualitative camps, are united in a mission to develop general principles and approaches for their preferred epistemologies and methodologies. Let me elaborate. One of the biggest fissures within social science in general, and political science in particular, is appropriate use of quantitative (Geddes 2003) and qualitative epistemologies and methods (Mahoney 2009; King, Keohane, and Verba 1994; Falleti 2006; Steinberg ; Collier 2011). There have been seismic shifts over the initiation, and response to, these struggles for methodological dominance. This robust efforts to emphasize quantitative methods and the search for universal understandings of the world within American Political Science Association in the 1980s as economists like Ostrom, moved to political science and promoted its "rational choice" strand; and in a similar vein, the behavioural revolution (Isaac 2015) that focused on public opinion studies (Inglehart 1977) greatly expanded quantitative studies that were meant to replace what they critiques as descriptive work in institutions and governance.

However, these approaches have been criticized as not only expanding some sources of knowledge, but narrowing attention to others. This is important since the orientation does poorly at generate insights for changes in values that, history tells us, sit outside of their empirical focus, such as those changes in the first wave of environmentalism that were not derived from, nor understood by, behaviouralist research on preferences that experimentalism ontologies focus (Schultz, Khazian, and Zaleski 2008; Dolnicar, Knezevic Cvelbar, and Grün 2017; Terrier and Marfaing 2015; Kormos, Gifford, and Brown 2015; Gowdy 2008). Recognition of this also confronts the "experimentalist" turn and "nudging" rather also reinforce existing preferences to reflect on how to shift attention, rather than how to shift the underlings norms and values themselves (Gifford, Kormos, and McIntyre 2011; Griskevicius, Cialdini, and Goldstein 2008; Kreitmair and Bower-Bir 2021; Sturm et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2018).

Similarly, there were parallel concerns that these projects "black boxed" the state, and undermined the way in which "policies create politics" (Isaac 2015) led to a backlash (Shapiro and Green 1994) as the historical institutionalist projects promoted and practices by Hall (2003) and Skcopol (1995) who successfully ran a "Perestroika" campaign to be elected APSA president on a platform of bringing qualitative methods "back in". These efforts have also been shaped by anthropologists such as James Scott who practices "ground theory" in local contexts that generating incredibly importance insights about the world that others has completely missed (Scott 1998). I had the good fortune of debating, with Ostrom, research design during APSA's Boston meeting in 1997 during my Fulbright at Harvard. Similar debates were occurring within international relations, as the quest for universal insights through application of increasingly sophisticated quantitative methods led some to critical them for being so focused on generating universal insights, that they had, by default, to become increasingly narrow. In one major critique of this increasingly hegemonic group made qualitative constructivists, Bernstein and et al (Bernstein et al. 2000) argued that this growing community's focus on "precision" rather than "accuracy" led to rath benign conclusions, such as "neighbouring states are more likely to engage in war than non-neighbouring states"

Recognition of these debates and counter debates is that despite their rigour, most of these efforts have produced a quest for guiding principles that do not base their recommendations or conclusion on their problem-solving potential but instead as a question to develop research design cannons that can guide their communities in common knowledge generating practices. While this approach has led to incredible knowledge generation communities, it has created moles by undermining required integration, as I show in section III, for generating Type 4 policy solutions.

*An abductive middle ground*

Instead, and for these reasons I apply what can best be called a "red thread" dot connecting narrative approach (Büthe 2002) that is aimed at generating and seeing a causal world that was missed by most qualitative and quantitative scholars, and that has had significant and important causal impacts in the very ways we unconsciously see, study, and offer solutions for managing the world's most pressing challenges. To this end, I place this book in the middle of two techniques that are "ill fit for purpose" for assessing the argument I poste: Popperian chasing universal understandings of the world, from those that give up by generating knowledge for a particular corner of the world. I refer to this middle approach as a way to generate "causal influence" logics that allow us to relax some degree of precision in favour of problem relevant accuracy.

<fig>

For these reasons, this approach is consistent with, and paves the way for, more in-depth "process tracing" (Collier 2011) efforts that can be applied to particular cases to assess drift. However, I also go further. I argue in the book that our quest in explaining the past has shackled an ability to think about how social sciences itself has, historically played a role in shaping the future, and, as a result, our ability to change the tragic pathway on which we are currently embarked.

*Forward causality*

The biggest challenge but largely interrogated by most of these cannons on social sciences research, is that if researchers can inform policy design thinking that might produce new historical critical junctures, the evidence that they are right shows up too late to inform the policy design. Let me repeat that. If the evidence a social scientist is right and might find a way to change course, the evidence does not yet exist because her recommendations, if acted upon, would create the new future. And she cannot get in a forward time machine to see how things went and then come back to the present to inform her design. While these challenges have been articulated by some for quite some time (Bernstein et al. 2000; Levin et al. 2012), mainstream sustainability policy and governance scholars and practitioners, tend to undermine forward thinking by drawing on elegant, but imprecise, quantitative and sophisticated modelling that as I show in Part III, these are shackled by Type 2 and 1 behavioural assumptions that cannot incorporate multiple step causal influences. The result is a strong emphasis in turning to backward-looking empirical research (Stechemesser et al. 2024; Pottinger et al. 2024) to tragically, seek to identify generalizable patterns of policy impacts and human responses with which to predict the effectiveness of policy tools into the future that, narrow, rather than seek to imagine new futures and that change rather than accept, extant feasibilities. Hence, this research positioning is also justified on the basis of overcoming the tragedy of "data-driven" and "evidence based" metaphors that undermine the creation of future evidence (Fukuyama 2024). In sum, both quantitative and qualitative methods are necessary but insufficient (Mertens 2015; Moon and Blackman 2014; O'Neill et al. 2013).The quantitative biased groups tends to go universal but shallow, while the qualitative groups tends to go deep but narrow. This means that I follow a "historical narrative" dot connecting approach with which to identify this phenomenon of the four types, and the unconscious bias, that had been missed by both approaches.

##### ii. Structure of chapters

The remainder of this book assesses the argument in the following steps. Chapter One takes care to review the 4PT framework by firs disentangle, the four problem types that apply to any problem, with the four schools of thought and practice that have emerged to reinforce each type within the world of environment and sustainability policy and governance. I detail several key dimensions to reveal not only their coherence, elegance and depth, but also how each would subtly work to reinforce and bias their preferred type.

Part III presents the result of the empirical assessment. As a full assessment of the multiple tentacles and influences of these schools would take volumes and many lifetimes, I assess the framework against four measures that, if the argument has merit, would have to show evidence of this influence: sustainability outcomes (Chapter Two); scholarship (Chapter Three), and practice (Chapter Four). Together these provide overwhelming evidence in support of my descriptive and multiple tentacle explanation for the environmental policy paradox. Chapter One shows clear evidence of results consistent with highly effective Optimization school policy designs, important and positive results favouring the Compromise school's mission, and a mixed bag regarding the Common's schools concerns. I that also shows evidence that the rapid decline in Prioritization school problems were caused by whack-a-mole effects of effective policy designs promoted by one or more of the other schools.

Chapter Three explores drift in sustainability research including unconscious "Achilles heels" biases in each school that have caused drift, and then turns to a select review of the way members of each school conduct research, ask questions, deploy meths, and makes recommendations for the future, that are all shape by pre-existing biases of the school to which they belong – including my own inadvertent culpability in causing drift through my collaborative work on conceptualizing "super wicked problems" (SWPs ). I then explore examples of these biases in sustainability scholarship governing climate, biodiversity and forests. Finally, I present the results of our coding on peer reviewed journals to show overwhelming bias in Type 3, 2 and 1 problem conceptions. Chapter Four turns to assess the role of drift, and of these schools, in the practice of sustainability policy and governance. I first assess professional environment schools train their students, including the result of our coding assessment on their teaching curricula. I then turn to review design and approach of "finance and market driven" (FMD) tools that, over 35 years, have drifted from incorporating Type 4 concerns to instead, advancing improvements in Type 3, 2 and 1 outcomes. I then turn to the practice of sustainable development policy goals to review a the role of a "synergies" bias that largely shutting the door on Type 4 conceptions as the recent reincarnation through the "Sustainable Development Goals" emphasizes implementation in synergies rather than deciding which moles to whack first.

Part III then pivots from critique to hope, by asking how scholars and practitioners who unconsciously caused this drift can, and must, generate and integrative their diverse knowledge sources to reverse course. I do this by spending time in chapter Five the critical "integrative anticipatory policy design" skills that would need to be developed, and given as much attention, as we now give to (Type 3) dispute resolution techniques, (Type 2) cost-benefit analysis, and (Type 3) collective action problems. I then show, in Chapter Six the utility of this design framework in explaining policy success in failures in attempting to achieve the acceleration of climate friendly technologies, trade based environmental interventions, and the thorny case of jurisdiction wide carbon taxes. Chapter Seven then turns to the case of thermostatic policies and institutions to show their historical impact in solving specified policy objectives, and its enormous, untapped potential in managing Type 4 climate, biodiversity and forest outcomes.

I conclude the book in Part IV by reflecting on how the books lessons might be applied in the practice of policy design so that we can "bring the environment back in". This task, in turn, requires incorporating theories and knowledge about how policy design learning might generate support from problem-oriented individuals and organizations who might be able to draw on, but not be shackled by, their own short term self interest in favour of building multiple step policy interventions capable of meeting, rather than averting, the Type 4 climate, biodiversity and forest's environmental challenges. I also justify my call for the development of an interdisciplinary "Marshall plan" aimed at integrating necessary research conducted by all four schools in which we may be united in common purpose to integrating what is now our individual efforts that can produce necessary but insufficient knowledge for managing Type 4 problems.

### 1. The 4PT Framework

The 4PT framework begins with two seemingly straightforward questions, the answer of which carries profoundly important implications for how analysts and practitioners see some problems over others, conduct empirical research, and make policy recommendations. The first question asks whether the analysis seeks to enhance *utility* of some kind. The second questions asks whether the analysis seeks to *solve* the problem at hand. These distinctions apply not only to the environment, climate and natural resources management but to any and all "on the ground" problems whether they are the focus of specialists working in health, social work, education, and even for that matter agricultural mining and energy.

Notably, I use the term "on the ground" to refer to substantive, empirically measurable policy problems such as the release of a toxic chemical in streams, traffic fatalities, the possible extinction of a particular species, access to K-12 education, suicide, and so on. This term distinguishes policy objectives broader but more abstract goals such as "environmental conservation", "equity" or "human rights" which are critically important for framing conversations, but tell us nothing about what policy objective, exactly, is being targeted nor what policy objective needs to be achieved to effectively manage a particular problem {Cashore, 2007 #29279}(Cashore and Howlett 2004; Howlett and Cashore 2009). Put another way, although most analysts rarely ask these questions of themselves up front, they all, must, by definition, take approaches that answer these questions. It is impossible not to do so.

My individual and collaborative efforts to think about these questions began in 1993 when I gave a presentation on policy learning to as side event at the Climate Cop in Warsaw Poland. They accelerated following a presentation to Copenhagen Business School's sustainability center when Professor Jeremy Moon suggested I expand my then three problem types to four. These efforts led me to distinguish each of the four constellation of the four types, identify and detail the four reinforcing schools, and, as a result, to draft, and redraft, with collaborators and research assistants and postdocs, a code book to facilitate coding qualitative against the four types. It is also important to recognize that the framework itself does not take a position on which of the four problem types is most important. Rather, its purpose is to render conscious what is often unconscious framing, which should be of assistance for anyone researching or analysing policy decisions and outcomes. It is expected that these 4PT distinctions will help uncover and improve work on policy styles, and even density and intensity of policies, that generally ignore the specific kind of problem to which the policy is being directed (Judge-Lord, McDermott, and Cashore 2020). The four problem types distinction also pave the way for the identification of relevant and more complex schools of thought that bias each type, the specific manifestation of which may be different across broad problem domains such as health, education, human rights, and so on. Just describing each school – including using the heuristic I develop below – will also help explain why they reinforce one problem type over the other. What the 4PT framework does and should not do, but paves the way for, is to develop a theory as to why some schools dominate over others, and what causes change over time. For the reasons the 4PT framework paves the way for assessing the argument I am making in this book about the way the Compromise, Optimization and Commons schools have caused drift away from Type 4 challenges. However, the framework can be used to understand and explain any outcome – including for example, those who want to understand better the impact and role of the Commons school vis-à-vis its seemingly similar, but actually quite different, Optimization cousin. This means that this chapter will also provide important foundations for those seeking to apply, and even continued to build, the companion 4PT code book.

For these reasons the chapter reviews the 4PT framework in the following steps. First, I review "utility" and "problem solving" labels as the two key distinctions that position the 4PT framework. This is an important section given two distinctions represent the conceptual building blocks that are behind the two questions that pave the way for, and help identify the four schools.
Second, I review examples of the 4PTs that emerge for each cell, focusing, for illustrative purposes, on non-environment cases. Third, I review the key schools of thought and practice that dominate the environment and sustainability policy conversations within and across multiple levels of governance. These combine to set the stage for a systematic assessment in Part III of evidence for Type 4 drift, as well as building Type 4 policy design capacities discussed in Part IV.

#### a) Conceptual building blocks: utility and problem solving

At firs the task of distinguish whether scholarly and practitioner policy analyses emphasise, or not, "utility" and "problem solving" seems quite straight forward.

*Utility*

**The first distinction** was derived from my reading of the literature, and engagement with interdisciplinary colleagues both at Auburn University's School of Forestry, and Yale's Environment school, as well as interdisciplinary scholarly practitioner networks, where I noticed that many scholars and practitioners **believed** that enhancing "**utility**" outcomes were, and are, the key task facing sustainability policy analysis. It turns out that a large group feel that the more utility was enhanced, the better off society will be. Yet while this causal belief is widely diffused among a range of analysts, it is also hotly debated by scholars and analysts who either oppose utility as a guiding orientation, and/or seek other ways to frame desired outcomes. Regardless as to where we situate ourselves on this dimension, there is no doubt that this causal belief, and subsequent analytical orientin, usefully distinguishes distinguish sustainability policy and governance analyses.

*The utility label covers a broad range*

Cashore's 4PT framework notes that the term "utility" is generally applied and defined broadly. It includes for example, those trained in welfare economics who, largely focusing on income or economic growth, convert others outcomes to "utility equivalents" in order to monetize, and compare, human preferences for green space and nature, with their direct interest in generating income. The term "utility" also incorporates the broader philosophy of "utilitarianism" that seeks to advance outcomes that produce the "greatest good for the greatest number in the long run". It is also used more generally as a term to discuss whether, in terms of enhancing individual or collection satisfactions, there is any "utility" in a proposed course of action?

For Cashore, the rationale for use of "utility" as a label was that it best captures the general belief behind a range of analyses that their goal is to improve "**human satisfactions**". This is an important clarification because the utility as a term has a decidedly anthropogenetic orientation in which policy is geared towards improving the interests of humans either today or in the future. This, in turn, is shaped by some kind of homage and widespread work developing theories relevant to unpacking human "**self-interest**". What is important for coding on the 4PT framework is that the concern itself is what is important – i.e. the utility label in the 4PT framework is shorthand to capture those who are motivated to advance human self-interested satisfactions that incorporate a range of more specific satisfaction seeking rationales.

This orientation in turn, permit an exploration to identify efforts to promote and understand **self-interested behaviours at multiple levels** of sustainability policy and governance including individual, organizational, nation state decisions as well as those within international governance arenas and global governance agreements. Hence, the utility label includes, analyses focused on aggregating **individual utility**, **organizational utility** (such as companies returning shareholder value), or even **states' utility** by maximizing their own self-interested preferences. This category incorporates, rather than distinguishes, longstanding debates among neo-realist and neo-liberal institutionalist scholars within international relations about whether self-interested, utility chasing states, are motivated to achieve relative or absolute gains. (The 4PT framework notes that debates about relative or absolute gains have undermine the similar quest to advance utility seeking interests, including, at the state level, relying on some conception of "national interest" that improves the satisfaction of its population through some kind of beneficial "rational" outcome).

**Hence, this broad use of the utility label focuses on identifying any kind of analysis that is motivated by enhancing human satisfaction through self-interested preference maximization.** This captures in one category a range of scholarship and analysis that although diverse and nuanced, are united by their underlying orientation in emphasizing individual, organizational and state based preferences that pay homage to improving human "satisfactions" at multiple levels.

*Problem solving*

**The second distinction** came from my recognition that while some narrowed their conclusion to assessing how to solve or effectively manage the clearly specified problem at hand- such as such as saving a particular species from extinction, avoiding resource collapse of a specified fish stock, or limiting warming to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels – others brought in analytical frames that allowed for a deliberations over not only how, but *whether* the problem at hand could or should be solved. That is, this latter group applied adjudicating frameworks that were developed as a way to *address* any particular problem – regardless as to its unique features - that might find its way to the societal or policy agenda in mind. Rather than generating research and analysis to shed light on how to manage a specific policy challenge, this group was united by developing frameworks that allow for consideration of not acting at all, or acting in a way that does not effectively manage the problem at hand.

*The problem solving label: distinguishing analyses that target "how", not "whether"*

The term "problem solving" is also used broadly to capture a range of expertise and approaches that undertake research with which to solve or effectively manage a particular "on the ground" problem. That is, they eschew asking "whether" a problem can be effectively managed, and instead ask, given the problem at hand, how can it be effectively managed?

This category then incorporates a broad group of scholars and analysts who are united in their quest to understand and effectively management an "on the ground" problem such as the extinction of a particular species or limiting warming to no more than 1.5/2 °C above pre-industrial levels promoted through the Paris Accord. This means that the analyses they bring, and conclusions they make, will go back to implications for generating knowledge useful for problem solving of a problem, or a class of problems. Similarly, these analysts will never apply universal pre-established theories to assess whether the problem at hand *ought* to be solved. This is not their interest. Likewise while their research may carry lessons for other problems, they do not seek to generate universal theories that can be applied to any kind of problem.

Put another way, this group of scholars would, for these reasons, avoid any quest for developing a theoretical orientation, or set of recommendations, that went beyond the problem or class of problems from which their research was derived. The practical result is that many in this category tend to carefully assess problem structure or "key features of the problem" they are attempting to shed light on how to better manage or solve.

This is important. The reason they eschew any effort to develop a universal way to address any problem is because, by disconnecting from problem structure, the approach applied elsewhere might not effectively manage or solve another class of problems – i.e. it might even make those worse off. This means that they are largely conducting research in which its lessons are "problem contingent". Any effort to generate lessons beyond a class of problems that is offered as a way to think about, and manage, all problems, is evidence that a scholarly analysis is not in this category. More specifically, any effort that concludes it is not "feasible" or "rational" to address a particular problem at hand that draws on a pre-established theory or framework that that was developed to analyse any and all problem is outside of this sorting category.

#### b) Four problem types

The really interesting results is that answering these two questions leads to the identification of four ways to conceive of, measure, and treat, any range of problems that comes across the desk of a policy analyst for advocate for that matter. Type 1 includes frames in which a problem is treated as something that must be solved, and that doing so requires enhancing utility outcomes governing that problem only. Type 2 covers those frames that focus on enhancing aggregate utility outcomes when considering how to assess, and respond to, the problem at hand. This captures those approaches that develop a pre-conceived frame with which to compare, and consider the effects of solving a particular problem at hand on a range other problems. In these cases considerations are made about not only how and to what extent, but whether the problem at had solvable. Type 3 captures those approaches that also develop pre-determined frameworks that, in incorporating consideration of how solving the problem at hand might affect a range of to other problems, but unlike Type 2, champions alternative motivations for action to determine how to compare, and whether the problem is solvable. Type 4, like Type 1, develops frameworks in which a problem is treated as something that must be solved, but rejects utility or human satisfactions as the guiding motivation. Indeed most analyses develop to address a Type 4 problem generally view, or empirically find, that utility chasing policies were usually the cause of, rather than the solution for, the problem at hand.

> Table 1.0: The Four Problem Types- Expanded Distinctions

| Type | Problem solving?<br><sub>Is the analysis, conclusions, and theories generated from, and narrowed to, understanding, improving, or solving, a clearly specified “on the ground” problem or class of problems?</sub> | Utility dominates?<br><sub>Does the analysis, conclusions, and theories treat individuals, organizations and states as largely self-interested, satisfaction driven entities that seek some kind “utility enhancing” outcome?</sub> | Description |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :--- |
| **TYPE 1** | **YES** | **YES** | **utility/**<br>analytical frame focuses on how a problem can be solved |
| **TYPE 4** | **YES** | **NO** | **not utility/**<br>analytical frame focuses on how a problem can be solved |
| **TYPE 2** | **NO** | **YES** | **utility/**<br>pre-conceived analytical frame determines whether a problem is solvable |
| **TYPE 3** | **NO** | **NO** | **Multiple values and interests /**<br>pre-conceived analytical frame determines whether a problem is solvable |

Before turning to identify the four schools that emerge from applying this typology to sustainability and environmental policy analytics, let us consider non-environment examples of each of these types.

*Type 1: utility/problem solving required*

One of the most common forms of Type 1 comes to us courtesy of those working what is known as "collective action problems". Collective Action theorists are motivate by eliminating utility undermining outcomes such as rubber necking on highways, hording of toilet paper during pandemics, or over harvesting of water supplies. These approaches draw on the classic "prisoners dilemma" metaphor in which, in the absence of an ability to develop and comply with, a collective agreements, two prisoners in different cells both have a "self-interest" to confess because if they do not, but their partner in crime does, they will be handed a much higher and longer prison sentence. This "confessing/confessing" strategy is considered to the most effective utility enhancing approach given no collective agreement (an outcome known as the "Nash equilibrium) but it is not the most utility enhancing solution. The most utility enhancing solution is for both not to confess, as this will lead to lower prison sentences overall. In this case, there analytical frame focuses on how to build and design collective action institutions to allow for both not to confess. These efforts have been promoted by "game theorists" who populate policy schools around the world. They often treat as objective their subjective framing of problems as collective action concerns that can be assessed, and treated, through utility enhancing rationalist frames

*Type 2: utility/problem solving not required*

The most common forms of Type 2 frames comes to the world courtesy of cost-benefit analysis (CBA) in which those trained within economics seeks to compare policy options available to address a given problem at hand not on the ability to manage the problem per se, but to generate a policy option that enhances overall utility outcomes – usually measured by income or economic productivity. Anyone working in any problem oriented applied school, from health to agriculture to social work to resources management, will be keenly aware of, and have many colleagues, whose methods and recommendations situate then in this type. CBA frameworks do does not just explore a range of policy interventions, but they also projects the effects of those policies on economy wide outcomes. If no option can be identified in which growth does not occur, then CBA assessments believe that the right policy answer is to do nothing. To be sure, CBA spends a great deal of time incorporating moles – what they call "trade-offs" by granting utility enhancing values to a range of environmental and social outcomes usually by conducing some kind of "willingness to pay" survey of individuals. However this approach reinforces Type 2 thinking, rather than considering non-utility enhancing motivations.

However, CBA is not the only approach that fits in Type 2. For example both neo-realist and neo-liberal international relations scholars seek to generate theories of state preference, including longstanding debates about whether states maximize their preferences owing to absolute or relative gains(Keohane and Nye 1989, 1972; Snidal 1991).Their debates about underlying motivations that shape a given state's "self-interest" preferences mask their overall agreement that their theories and frameworks designed to explain **state behaviour in general** apply to any and all problems facing states. That is, they seek universal understandings of satisfaction utility chasing state preference to explain why states do, or do not cooperate, and the implications of this for not only how, but whether a specified problem can be managed. To be clear, they develop universal theories of state action that are not derived from, or limited to, any specific problem or issue states happen to be deliberating over.^6 That is, these theories of state action also inform recommendations from these scholar about how states might act go address a specific problem in order to better achieve their pre-existing self-interested preferences (i.e. how to "optimize" outcomes given existing understandings of state preferences).

*Type 3: Not utility/problem solving not required*

The most common forms of **Type 3** frames concern scholars and practitioners who seek some way to understand how, and to generate solutions for, individuals, organizations and states deliberate over a policy problems that incorporates multiple values and interests. There are many different kinds of theories that have been proposed over the years within political science and sociology to explain such deliberative engagement that is often aimed at improving legitimacy and trust within and across society and the state (Rosenbluth and Shapiro 2018) including Dahls' classic tome of pluralism (Dahl 1961b), corporatism (Coleman and Skogstad 1990) and collaborative governance mechanisms across multiple levels (Ansell and Gash 2008). It also applied approaches such as those who research, teach, and train in "alternative dispute resolution" (ADR) (Kelly and Alper 1995; Halbert and Lee 1990)and multistakeholder engagement aimed at getting to consensus (Coglianese 1996) rather than problem solving (Bryson, Crosby, and Stone 2015, 2006).

Another stand of the compromise school has been nurtured by those studying philosophy which seeks to generate a set of norms and protocols for making difficult decisions – such as whether to save someone stopped on the train tracks that might risk the lives of many on the train. In these cases, pre-existing approaches for developing normative theory based protocols for doing so – not based on utility per se but on claims to higher level "ethics" are turned to as a way to have society and policy makers thinks about managing difficult questions – from species extinctions that results from enhancing economic growth – to saving lives during a pandemic when the isolationist policies for doing say may undermine children's cognitive development. In these cases what is important for the 4PT framework is that the adjudicating analysis that result are meant to help policy makers and society make decisions to address any problem that might come along, and are not derived, narrowed to, or contingent, on a particular class of problems.

While diverse and unique, these approaches are united by their efforts to draws on theories of individual and organization behaviour as a way foster a compromise agreement among disparate interests. While drawing on theories that extend far beyond, and reject, utility motivations as far to narrow an approach to human behaviour, they share the same mission in developing a pre-conceived theory about motivations as a way to generate an understanding about not only how, but whether, the "on the ground" issue, or set of issues, can be resolved. Hence whether originating from a particular set of ethical frames in philosophy, sociology, geography or critical theory, one never knows for sure whether applying a particular one of these approaches to a particular problem will result in the problem at hand being solved or effectively managed. In other words, in contrast to the teleological orientation of Types 1 and 4, Type 3 approaches work from a preexisting framework – or develop a framework from a case that is meant to apply to any chase – rather than developing a framework that only pertains to that problem or class of problems.

*Type 4: Not utility/problem solving required*

Curiously Type 4 problem frames are rhetorically quite common among practitioners and scholarship, especially those trained, or housed, in applied schools including health, social work, education, agriculture, water, forestry, resources, and as I discuss below, environmental management. This is because the origins behind so many applied schools were owing to concerns that some kind of "on the ground" problem needed careful attention to helping address, and that, in most cases, unregulated Type 2 activities were seen as the culprit.

This school's origins begin, and end with, an assessment of how a policy intervention might be deployed to effectively manage a specified problem – most of which were identified as the result of effective Type 2, 3 or even 1 policy interventions.

Arguably the most illustrative example concerns efforts to think about, and achieve, anti-slavery objectives. A range of scholarly analyses assessing this problem have found that the only way to ensure slavery is dramatically reduced or eradicated is to begin, and end, with the required outcome: i.e. no one, for any reason, is allowed to own another person. Many apply relevant frameworks have not only found that (Type 1 and 2) utility chasing motivations was behind slavery in the first place, but that application of Type 3, 2 frames permits deliberations over whether slavery ought to be considered – which, by definition, undermines an ability to achieve the desired outcome. For this group the only way to eradicate slavery to develop policies and interventions based on achieving no-slavery. The idea of applying cost-benefit analysis, or alternative dispute resolution, to assessing not only how, but whether, slavery can be eradicated is anathema to this strands of the prioritization school because it opens the door to consider policy options in which slavery might continue. Another example is anti-colonial norms in which reducing or averting an attempt by one country to take over another can only be achieved by teleological approaches that beginning, and end, with the absence of colonialism. Hence scholarly analysis reinforcing Type 4 hence would reject Type 2 neo-liberal and neo-realist IR theories to assess how to address anti-slavery norms as its theory of state preferences sits outside of considerations required for solving the problem at hand – i.e. there cannot and must not be colonial activity even if doing so would more optimally realize state's utility chasing preferences. Hence, Type 4 frames reject commensurability biases of Type 3 and 2 orientations as permitting consideration of futures, based on pre-established theories of action, that may not resolve the problem, rather than finding ways to do so (Tribe 1972). They also reject Type 1 frames for narrowing consideration of problem solving to ones that, ironically, in chasing human satisfactions have been criticized for narrowing the human condition.

#### c) The Four Schools of Sustainability Thought and Practice

Application of the 4PT framework to, with, and from, a systematic review of sustainability policy and governance scholarship lead to the identification of four distinct "schools of thought and practice" that reinforced each problem type: Commons (Type 1 reinforcing); Optimization (Type 2 reinforcing); Compromise (Type 3 reinforcing) and Prioritization (Type 4 reinforcing)
To be sure there are a number of sub strands in each school that further work can carefully disentangle. However for the purpose of this book and other wide-ranging analyses, the types and schools distinctions provides arguably the greatest analytical traction for documenting empirical results in Part III and for generating design insights in Part IV. Likewise, there are, to be sure, other schools of thought and practice that reinforce each Type – whether exploring the environment or for that matter public health or education or social problems. Nonetheless, these four schools of thought and practice arguably represent the key forces of unconscious and conscious bias that have shaped, and changed, how we trains student and practitioners to view the world of environment and sustainability, bias empirical assessments and solve some problems that make other worse. This efforts positions, rather than provides an assessment of, relevant dominant schools that might be at play in non-environmental cases.

> Table 1.1: The 4PT Framework and Schools of Sustainability

| Problem Type | On the ground problem?<br><sub>Is the analysis, conclusions, and theories generated from, and narrowed to, understanding, improving, or solving, a clearly specified "on the ground" problem or class of problems?</sub> | Utility dominates?<br><sub>Does the analysis, conclusions, and theories treat individuals, organizations and states as largely self-interested, satisfaction driven entities that seek some kind "utility enhancing" outcome?</sub> |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| **TYPE 1<br>(Commons)** | **YES** | **YES** |
| **TYPE 4<br>(Prioritization)** | **YES** | **NO** |
| **TYPE 2<br>(Optimization)** | **NO** | **YES** |
| **TYPE 3<br>(Compromise)** | **NO** | **NO** |

*Source: Created by Cashore, first published in table format in Cashore and Bernstein (2022)*

To identify these schools of sustainability thought and practice, and leading strands within them Cashore disentangled began by first reviewing their approach to **utility**/non-utility and **problem contingent**/non-problem contingent (universal) orientations and then added a number of other dimensions that shed further light not only on the schools, but how these dimensions work to reinforce each of the four types. **Solution orientation** reviews the kinds of preferred policy solutions or interventions that the school, for various reasons, tends to favour over others. **Ethical motivations** captures the underlying purpose behind the emergence of the school in the first place that are explicit in some cases but implicit in others; **dominant disciplines** generates propositions about which ones seem more likely to champion this school over others; the **dominant methodologies** that result (especially concerning the quantitative and qualitative divide); the resulting and sophisticated **theory building project**; their **approach to effectiveness**; hidden or uninterrogated **implicit biases**; and finally, their effects in thinking about, and addressing, **birds and moles**: i.e. their biases in finding synergies by attempts to "kill two birds with one stone" versus their biases in inadvertently causing other problems that I refer to, drawing on earlier collaborative work, as the "whack-a-mole" effect.

Answering these questions leads to four different kinds of problem attention styles that are always at play when policy makers and advocates seek to address policy problems. Type 1 captures those that do seek to enhance some kind of utility outcome governing a problem at hand – such as say restaurant workers who, addicted to their phones, do not give customers attention they would need to return a second time, but do not take into consideration whether solving that problem might create other problems – such as say – banning the use of phones during working hours that make it difficult for mothers to communicate with child care workers the number of hours that are needed on a particular day.

What is most novel about this framework, and what sets it apart from existing work, is that it targets the ways in which each school treats "whack-a-mole" effects: i.e. the phenomenon in which successfully addressing one problem makes others worse. While the sustainability governance literature often refers to these issues as "trade-offs", I call for a much more nuanced approach that recognizes distinct, but largely hidden ways, in which each of these schools' deeply rich and sophisticated ethical obligations provide different ways to conceive of, and address, inevitable moles. It also shows that despite limited attention to moles, these schools promote strong synergies biases when confronted with whack-a-mole effects, which results in redesigning, or creating new interventions, to uncover them, rather than confronting their problem conception biases.

I show how all schools recognize, and have well developed internally coherent adjudicating frameworks, for whacking moles. However, they are silent on the *external moles* that pop up when successfully and effectively managing their school's approach to sustainability outcomes. Uncovering these external moles reveals how the Commons, Optimization and Compromise schools *limit* an ability to ameliorating Type 4 problems to those that are *synergistic* with their preferred Type. That is, they implicitly advance an approach to problem solving that does not simply ask how innovative policies might be developed to ameliorate climate and species extinctions, but *whether*, given each school's adjudicating framework, it is rational or feasible to do so. This helps explain the eyebrow raising conclusion of leading sustainability governance scholars that, despite widespread evidence that effective policies governing sustainability goals championed by Commons, Optimization and Compromise schools *caused* climate and species extinctions moles (Nilsson and Weitz 2019b; Independent Group of Scientists 2019; Khamila et al. 2022), synergies among environmental, social and economic goals "far exceeds the number of trade-offs" (IPCC 2018, sec. 2.5.3) and that, where whack-a-mole effects do occur, they can be converted into synergies through careful design of transition portfolios (IPCC 2018, 33).

In contrast, the Prioritization school's internal approach to adjudicating moles does not leave it to chance that synergies can be found with other sustainability goals and objectives. Instead, it fosters an analytical technique that begins, and ends, with lexical ordering: i.e., its starting point is that second order moles that result from successfully managing higher ranked first order problems must be treated *sequentially*, and only in ways that do not undermine higher ranked problems. Uncovering these differences is profoundly important because they make clear that only the Prioritization school's adjudicating framework is "fit for purpose" for identifying effective and unconditional solutions for ameliorating the ecological effects of climate change, species extinctions, and, for that matter, the loss of indigenous peoples' traditional livelihoods.

In sum, all four schools are motivated by deeply entrenched, but competing, ethical foundations (Cashore and Bernstein 2022) that underpin each school's transformative policy design project (Visseren-Hamakers et al. 2023). These ethics, in turn, carry profound implications for how to think about, and address, inevitable synergies and "whack-a-mole"^1 effects (Levin et al. 2012), that can result from a highly effective policy design. Notably, the Compromise, Optimization and Commons schools narrow the ability to address problems conceived of through a Type 4 lens to those that are synergistic with Types 3, 2 and 1 conceptions (Cashore and Bernstein 2022). The framework has been applied to show how these (often) unconscious biases, and the metaphors they produce, can result in policies that are inconsistent with the scientific evidence about behavioural changes necessary for effectively managing critical problems including the climate and biodiversity crises.

##### **i. Commons (Type 1 reinforcing)**

***Problem solving? Yes.*** The Commons school is focused on designing "collective action" institutions capable of avoiding "tragedies of the commons" in which overharvesting causes catastrophic resource collapse. It draws on decades of attention understand and resolve "collective action" dilemmas (Goldstein and Lenway 1989) in which owing to absent or ineffective governance institutions individual utility enhancing "rational" behaviour in the short term leads to utility undermining "irrational" behaviour in the long run for both individuals and the broader community in which they are situated. Collective action scholars apply their lens to understand and manage "on the ground" problems from "rubber necking" on highways that cause utility undermining traffic jams, to the hoarding of toilet paper during pandemics (Cashore and Bernstein 2020). The role of collective action theory in sustainability studies was made famous by Garret Hardin (1968) most famously labelled these as "tragedies of the commons" which turned attention to goods such as grasslands, fish and timber, that have "subtractability" as their key structural feature: i.e. their use by one individual takes away the ability of another to also use that resource. This interest led Commons school has applied the collective action metaphor most notably in sustainability studies to the case of avoiding, or ameliorating, uncoordinated "open access" situations (Araral 2014) in which overharvesting leads to resource collapse. For these reasons they thought carefully about the types of institutional arrangements most capable of excluding access. This forms the bedrock of this schools approach, determining every other decision and approach. Initially and following Garret Hardin's famous essay generated widespread interest in finding ways to overcome "subtractability": i.e. those cases in which the use of a resource undermines the ability of another to use it. Ostrom would make profound innovative contributions by turning to conceptualizations of specific on the ground problems that for– for either biophysical reasons (such as the ability of fish to swim long distances) or traditional community practices (Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000) – as having features that made it impossible or difficult for policy makers to exclude access (Ostrom and Ostrom 1972).

***Utility dominates? Yes.*** Overcoming these undesirable conditions has been reinforced by a number of game theoretic metaphors (Nash 1953), most notably the "Prisoners dilemma", in which two thieves being interrogated in different cells and unable to coordinate make the utility chasing "rational" choice, to confess to even though collective silence would have produced lower aggregate prison terms. Hence collective action theory in general, and its application to sustainability studies in particular, begins, and ends, with the championing of optimal utility outcomes

***Solution orientation:*** two overall approaches emerged initially within this school: either privatizing land to individuals (who would now have, it was posited, individual incentives to produce long term utility enhancing benefits), or to turn to coercive state central authority and associated enforcement mechanisms. Ostrom would make profound innovative contributions by noting that for– for either biophysical reasons (such as the ability of fish to swim long distances) or traditional community practices (Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000) – as having features that made it impossible or difficult for policy makers to exclude access (Ostrom 1990). Formal incorporation of "excludability" yielded not one but four ways to classify, and label, economically suboptimal resource depletion challenges: subtractable and excludable "private goods"; subtractable but not excludable common pool resources; non-subtractable and excludable "club goods", and non-subtractable, non-excludable "public goods". Although many of Ostrom's students self-label today as environmental governance scholars, there is no dispute that GTC's focus, and design principles, were explicitly derived from economic sustainability challenges (Ostrom 1990, 3). However, what is interesting, and long forgotten, is that although her work would largely reinforce Type 1 problems, she saw an equally compelling need to engage in similar attention to Type 4 problem structures for those seeking design insights for ameliorating the degradation of ecological and biological systems (Ostrom 1990, 1).

> Table 1:2 Conception of Resource Goods

| Goods Category | Subtractable?<br><sub>(Does using it reduce it?)</sub> | Excludability<br><sub>(Is the renewable resource in question easily “excludable”?)</sub> |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| **Type 1 private goods**<br>(e.g., timber) | **Yes** | **Yes** |
| **Type 1 common pool goods**<br>(e.g., fish stocks) | **Yes** | **No** |
| **club goods**<br>(e.g., toll roads, professional associations) | **No** | **Yes** |
| **public goods**<br>(e.g., air) | **No** | **No** |

---

**NOTE:** Examples of goods in each cell are illustrative. Commons and sustainability scholars continue to differ on whether to treat trees, fish, and ecosystems as “private goods”, “common pool resources” and, in some cases, as “public” or “club” goods. These debates can be traced back, in part, to different ways in which categories and corresponding solutions are constructed (Young 2007: 3-4). For example, following Ostrom’s work in *Governing the Commons*, some view institutions, depending on their design, as causing or solving, a particular resource depletion tragedy (i.e. they constitute the “independent” variable). However, others view institutional arrangements, not simply biophysical features, as playing a role in making excludability difficult (i.e. they constitute part of the “dependent” variable). It follows that if a researcher deems institutions to have played

Ostrom also made it clear in GTC, and subsequently, that she believed that the tool of privatization, rather than coercive state control, was the most optimal for managing "strictly" private goods (Ostrom 2003, 259; Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000, 7).^1 Her concern was that the widespread application of the privatization solution to include non-excludable CPR type commons tragedies drew on "special models that utilize extreme assumptions" (Ostrom 1990, 183) that could produce even more tragic outcomes than if nothing had been done at all (Ostrom 1990, 13-14) such as the expropriation of communal forests that had historically avoided resource collapse (Bartley et al. 2008; Gibson, McKean, and Ostrom 2000). GTC further posited that local communal governance institutions, including "groups of individuals", rather than "distant" central authorities, were best poised to avoid or reverse, many types of unsustainable CPR practices (Ostrom 1990, 21-23, 60-61, 183-185). While this approach helps account for today's "subsidiarity" metaphor among development scholars, similar inductive reasoning however has led the commons school, guided by the "polycentric" metaphor, to advocate for the "scaling up" of its design principles to ameliorate economically sub-optimal "global commons" challenges that cut across multiple jurisdictions.^1

***Ethical motivations:*** researchers are often motivated by an expressed moral duty to help avoid the devastating effects that the collapse of an economically beneficial resource wreaks on human beings, especially resource dependent communities. To do this the guiding moral concern is to overcome these suboptimal outcomes through the development of collective institutional arrangements. Ostrom championed the primacy of this school in her presidential address to the American Political Science Association, arguing that: "… the theory of collective action is the central subject of political science" (Ostrom 1998, 1).

***Dominant disciplines:*** the discipline of economics forms the bedrock foundations for the Commons school, given its focus on utility enhancing management of natural resources. At the same time, especially following Ostrom, the focus on community governance as a preferred solution has drawn interest from anthropologists, and cousins in geography and sociological whose grounded theory methods provide necessary nuance for developing effective locally specific institutions.

***Dominant methodologies:*** the search for theories to inform particular Type 1 resource depletion tragedies – helps explain the commons school embracing of game theoretic models, and quantitative methods required to build them. Qualitative ethnographic methods play a supporting role in so far as their insights help improve model building (Brondizio, Ostrom, and Young 2009; Araral 2014, 12; Andersson, Evans, and Richards 2009).

***Theory building project:*** commons scholars and general, and Ostrom in particular, are clear that they are motivated to initiate "*better policies*" (Ostrom 1990, 29) for averting, or avoiding, depleting water, fish, timber, and other goods that contribute to human food systems, required "arranging for the supply of new institutions" (Ostrom 1990, 14) that must be placed on "how *best* to limit the use of natural resources so as to ensure their long-term *economic viability*" (Ostrom 1990, 1). Ostrom offered that getting the utility enhancing "institutions right" requiring identifying and granting "user rights", reducing "free-riding" risks and "commitment problems". She cautioned that successful efforts in "monitoring individual compliance with sets of rules" (Ostrom 1990, 27) would be "a difficult, time-consuming, conflict-invoking process" (Ostrom 1990, 14).

***Birds and moles:*** following Ostrom's seminal contribution, commons school scholars are now keenly aware of, and think deeply about avoiding, the devastating internal "whack-a-mole" effects that can occur when treating all commons tragedies as excludable. Less attention has been placed on three external whack-a-mole effects that fall outside its moral, theoretical and conceptual foundations. First, successfully targeting a specific good could result in an economically suboptimal Type 2 outcome if converting the land to a different commodity or use – such as mineral extraction, manufacturing, real estate or even tourism – would have produced higher society wide aggregate economic utility. Second, while the Commons School certainly turned to the importance of local cultural practices for their role in fostering collective long-term Type 1 sustainability in the absence of formal institutions (Ostrom 1990, 149, 166; Sethi and Somanathan 1996), it does not formally incorporate into its model historical cultural traditions that fall outside of, or are degraded by, an emphasis on economic utility (Buck 1998). Third, and most important for our analysis, negative environmental effects can, and usually do, result from the solving a resource depletion tragedy, including, for example, the ecologically degrading effects of sustained yield logging and fishing on forest and marine ecosystems. To be sure, Commons scholars have certainly considered the impact of utility enhancing frameworks on environmental degradation. However, arguably owing to this school's deeply entrenched moral foundations, such reflexive exercises tend to advance causal beliefs that Type 1 and Type 4 problems are synergistic (Prakash and Gupta ; Costanza 2006).

While this school is sophisticated about what to do to solve a collective action challenge, it does not provide intellectual guidance about which problem, from sustained yields of timber, to exotic crops from soy to palm to eucalyptus, to fisheries to local water management, ought to be given attention. This means that if effectively addressed, the solution may result in synergies and moles that were not part of the inductive reasoning that led to managing the specified Type 1 problem at hand. For example, managing fisheries as a Type 1 problem may, depending on the reproduction logic of the resource in question, require maintaining the entire structure and function of the ecosystem itself—even though that is not the concern of Type 1 problem frames. Interestingly the main recommendations from the 2005 economics of water report (Ovink 2024)– that was produced to mirror the Stern review (2007)on the Type 2 economics of climate and Dasgupta review (2021)on the Type 2 economics of biodiversity essentially concluded that if Type 1 water management across the world was to be conserved, the Type 4 ecological structure and function of forests and biodiversity needed to be maintained. However, the reverse can also be true, such as when successfully managing for the highest Type 1 sustained yields are found to undermine ecosystem system structure and function and/or render extinct particular species (Cashore and Howlett 2007). Likewise, the Commons school is largely silent on what to do when successfully designing institutional arrangements for managing a particular good in the long run might undermine an ability to convert the land to a more lucrative crop, such as palm oil or soy plantations, that would have provided even higher utility enhancing benefit (Cashore and Bernstein 2022).

***Effectiveness:*** For all these reasons the Common's school is anchored in achieving desired policy objectives facing a clearly specified, and measurable, "on the ground" challenge whether it is about maintaining the long-term supply of utility enhancing fish for a poverty stricken community, timber management in 1000s of forest dependent communities across India, or long term supplies of clean water facing local urban areas, there is no success, and no sense of accomplishment, if the specified issue at hand becomes degraded or collapsed. This is important because its attention on revisiting theories and prescriptions if they don't cause the resource good to be maintained (rather than simply managing degradation more slowly) is not only a critically important aspect of this School for Sustainability scholarship policy and governance, its approach to "on the ground" effectiveness in managing the particular Type 1 problem at hand, can, and must, be emulated by Type 4 problems that consumer the interest, and attention, of the Prioritization school. In sum, this school's problem orientation is decidedly not focused on ecological, but economic outcomes. As Ostrom made clear, "The issue in this case—and many others—is how best to limit the use of natural resources so as to ensure their long-term *economic viability*" (Ostrom 1990: 1).

##### **ii. Optimization (Type 2 reinforcing)**

***Problem solving? No.*** Those who belong to this school of sustainability thought and practice do not justify their analytical frames based on key features of a specified problem. Instead, they are united by developing approaches to thinking about, researching, and identifying solutions for managing any kind of problem that might reach the societal or policy agendas. They are united by theories and approaches that do not derive from the specific features of a particular kind of problem, but for developing universal approaches to address not only how, but whether, a problem can and ought to be effectively managed. To be sure, the key features of any "on the ground" problem at hand are certainly not ignored, but they do not constrain or narrow the universal theory building project about how to understanding satisfaction utility enhancing behaviours on the part of individuals, organizations or states. They may use an on the ground case to generate a universal theory, but the general theory will be applies beyond the case to to explain behaviour in general, and to identity and narrow policy solutions

***Utility dominates? Yes.*** Whereas the commons school champions a utility maximizing outcome to manage a clearly specified collective action problem, the optimization school advances the moral belief that any problem at hand must only be solved if solutions enhance the utility of individuals, organizations and states at the aggregate level (i.e. they can only effectively manage a particular problem at hand if doing so enhances satisfactions overall. If satisfactions are undermined overall by solving one problem in isolation, they develop implicit and explicit frames and methodologies that reinforce a morally inappropriate do solve a problem at hand if it undermines overall aggregate utility of individuals, organizations and states.

The major strand dominating sustainability policy and governance within this school are those who advance environmental economics. This group generally advances CBA by drawing neo-classical or behavioural techniques nurtured within the economics discipline. For this group, if a solution cannot be found to the specific issue at hand that doesn't result in the undermining of overall aggregate utility- what is also referred to as "social welfare", then the "rational" answer is that it cannot be solved. It is for these reasons that this school often advances a "partial" solution that is not in line with the problem at hand but does do something. Hence the Optimization school shares an interest with the Commons school in advancing some kind of utility or satisfaction for humans and their organization but differs in that it does not just address how to solve a problem at hand, but whether it is "rational" to do so.

***Solution orientation:*** For these reasons the solution is around maximizing satisfactions over all, which will determine not only how, but whether the problem at hand can be addressed.

***Ethical motivations:*** Within sustainability studies, this school's moral framework provided the dominant rationale for the creation of forestry, agriculture, and resource schools in Europe and North America that were motivated by utilitarian principles^7 of "the greatest good for the greatest number in the long run" (Pinchot 1987), as well as most post-WWII development agencies, including the World Bank. Of course, these are deeply held. To be sure, specific strands have all developed deeply ethical justifications. For example. The economic optimization strand of this school advances the moral belief that the quest for policy solutions that enhance aggregate economic utility is the best outcome for society as a whole (Kenny 2011; Sen 1979; Luke 2009). In contrast the international relations strand focuses on understanding why states cooperate, and based on that answer, to identifying, and helping create, the most "optimal" institutions to achieving the highest level of preferences. To be sure, the massive debate within this strand about whether relative or absolute gains motivate states to engage in international cooperation reinforce the universalist nature of this project that is disconnected from, but meant to be applied to, any policy that might come on the geo-political agenda.

***Dominant disciplines:*** Economics, rational and public choice political scientists, international relations scholars including neo-realists (emphasizing relative gains) and neo-liberal institutionalist (emphasizing absolute gains).

***Dominant methodologies:*** The nature of this school's quest for a universal theory to explain the empirical world they are interested in, from aggregate economic utility to optimal preferencing building state cooperation, means that quantitative methods are, and must, be, dominant. These include econometrics modelling and game theoretic analyses. The most dominant is "cost-benefit" analysis (Adler and Posner 2009; Arrow et al. 1996) in which disparate social, environmental, cultural and economic goals are given comparable economic utility values. The field of environmental economics advances this method based on their causal belief that the rational and feasible way to address environmental challenges is to convert them into economic values (Stavins 1995; Sachs et al. 2020; Thomas and Chindarkar 2019). This approach, which underpins the US Environmental Protection Agency's policy to value each statistical human life at $9.47 million USD (Environmental Protection Agency 2020) involves modelling across a range of outcomes, as well as discounting future economic impacts, to identify the "best" or most "rational" policy options. Internal debates – including whether policies must be avoided that increase economic inequality (Kaldor 1939) – whether measured as widening gaps in relative gains (Piketty 2015) or Pareto losses (Awan 2013) - reinforce the school's overarching emphasis on utility enhancing orientations by narrowing consideration of inequality to economic measures. Other methods for giving utility enhancing equivalents include the production of quantitative surveys of consumers and the public's "willingness to pay" so that concerns about species extinctions, wilderness, and the catastrophic ecological effects of climate change can be converted into economic values (Turner et al. 2003)

***Theory building project:*** arguably the most dominant of these strands today is economics which advances the causal belief that the rational and feasible way to address environmental challenges is to convert them into economic values (Nordhaus 1991; Stavins 1995; Sachs et al. 2020; Thomas and Chindarkar 2019). Drawing explicitly or implicitly on welfare economics,^1 that the ability to solve any kind of problem is conditional upon finding policy solutions that enhance aggregate economic utility for society as a whole (Kenny 2011; Sen 1979; Luke 2009).

This school of thought and practice also includes international relations sustainability scholarship on cooperation and rational institutional whose sophisticated analytical frameworks are designed to extend beyond, and are not derived from, the structural features of the environmental problem at hand. Rather, they generate their underlying theories from attempts to understand state cooperation generally that apply to any and all problems and from that, identify possible solutions to the problem at hand, such as climate change (e.g.Keohane 2016; e.g.Keohane and Victor 2016; Ovodenko and Keohane 2012; Koremenos 2016). To be clear, this does not mean that these scholars do not care about identifying possible solutions to the Type 4 environmental climate, biodiversity and forests crises – many of them do. Rather, their ability to do so in not derived from the key features of the problem at hand, but their theories of international cooperation.^8 It also applies to rational choice strands within political science who seek to understand ways to construct and maintain governance institutions capable of enhancing aggregate utility.

***Effectiveness:*** This school of thought therefore is not about achieving an environmental outcome qua and environmental outcome – such as say, doing what biologists say is required for averting a species from becoming extinct – but instead by whether this problem was handled in a way that maintain aggregate utility or some other equivalent, such a enhancing state preferences, whether based on absolute or relative gains. Hence, and given this school's ethical beliefs, it turns to empirical measures of aggregate utility, and corresponding asserted benefits for society that will accrue including poverty alleviation, directly and indirectly. Direct benefits include higher levels of employment and income. Indirect benefits include enhanced resources for health care, schools, and other social programs that can produce and improve the human conditions (Rawls and Laband 2004). This approach of this school has been credited with generating effective policy designs that have lifted millions out of poverty (Hasan 2021).

***Implicit biases:*** Adherents to the optimization school relay on utility maximization to assess not only how, but whether, it is rational to any particular problem that comes across the desk of a policy official, including climate and biodiversity.

***Birds and moles:*** For these reasons the Optimization school is devoted to bringing in as many problems as possible into their research and applied analysis so that policy officials do not inadvertently make a "suboptimal" choice owing to lack of information. This allows them to focus both on "positive" (birds) and "negative" (moles) externalities. This schools' approach certainly can, and does, lead to multiple tentacles associated with utility maximization such as greater community stability, lower levels of violence, and greater access to education and health care that often result from increasing income- even though the extent to which these will occurs will always be uncertain. The CBA strand addresses moles as unintended "externalities" that must be measured by giving these outcomes utility undermining values – usually through "willingness to pay" surveys – and then incorporating this into their models as a way to "internalizing" these "externalities". This approach is reinforced by their ethical foundations, and causal beliefs, that valuing nature economically will provide ancillary environmental benefits (Sell et al. 2007). This morality is also behind the "polluter pays" metaphor (Díaz-Reviriego, Turnhout, and Beck 2019b; OECD 1975, 1994) which holds that firms can chose to stop an environmentally degrading behaviour if the (economic) costs to the firm of continuing are too high, or it can continue polluting if the costs are deemed low and behind their turning to policies that encourage "payment for ecosystem *services*" (PES) (Sell et al. 2007).

At the same time this school's approach to address moles by giving them utility equivalents, can, and does, create new Type 1, 2 and 4 moles that neo-classical and behaviour economics in general, and the CBA strand in particular, rarely think about, let alone address . In a classic and disturbing example to members of the Prioritization school, (Type 2 reinforcing) economist William Nordhaus' has concluded, based on his sophisticated modelling of the economics of climate degradation^9, conclusion that that the most optimal, or "economically rational" future are world temperatures at 3.2°C warming above natural levels (Nordhaus 2017) despite (Type 4 reinforcing) scientific evidence produce by the world's leading scientists that 1.5/2°C is the maximum warming possible without risking catastrophic ecological changes (Cashore and Bernstein 2022; IPCC 2018). Hence, in Nordhaus' case even though he is focused on the climate crisis he is not problem contingent: i.e. he did not develop a theory and approach to solving the climate crisis at 1.5 or 2 °C. Rather he applied a pre-existing framework focused on maximizing aggregate utility that determines both how, and whether, a problem can be "rationally" solved. Keohane, chasing a theory of state cooperation based on absolute gains, takes the same overall ontological approach, albeit applying his own theories and methods.

Hence, while this school is sophisticated at internalizing a range of outcomes into utility enhancing models – it pays no attention to, nor does it accept as addressable (Rawls and Laband 2004), moles that this school creates. Most notably, its emphasis on economic growth can, through resulting industrialization processes, result in the homogenization of previously diverse local cultures, while associated increases in consumption can significantly stress the earth's environmental "carrying capacity." Similarly, its emphasis on existing "willingness to pay" calculations to convert environmental values into equivalent economic utility comparators, undermines reflexive considerations about the role of norm generation that may shift how humans conceive of ecological systems – such as viewing them not as providing services to humans to but as places worth of protection in their own right: i.e., conserving ecological systems qua ecological systems. In the most extreme, some rational choice political scientists have gone so far as to treat Type 1 and 2 human satisfying outcomes not only as synergistic, but as synonymous, with Type 4 environmental concerns (e.g. Lomborg 2001).

##### **iii. Compromise (Type 3 reinforcing)**

***Problem solving? No.*** The compromise school seeks to generate legitimate and trustworthy processes through which multiple perspectives and concerns are included when deliberating not only how, but whether, to ameliorate any given problem at hand. Like the optimization school the quest is not to develop a stakeholder process based on the specific features of the problem at hand and working backwards to find an effective policy solution, but rather, to apply a pre-existing approach to deliberations that the public, stakeholders, and policy makers deem to be appropriate.

***Utility dominates? No.*** This problem framing have been prominent at the international level since 1987 Brundtland Commission (WCED 1987), whose championing of a "three legged stool" of sustainability, as an *objective* way to achieve *sustainable outcomes*, permitted a bridge conversation with, but then sparked an "outside" critique of, the economic optimization school. At first, the Brundtland report articulated a now widely diffused a Type 2 anthropocentric moral imperative that sustainability required "meeting the needs of the current generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs". However, this framing would subtly but powerfully confront the economic optimization strand's narrowing of environmental and social problems to their utility enhancing benefits (not to mention that most in this strand, until Stern, accepted as objective, the subjective belief that longer term Type 2 outcomes must be "discounted" compared to immediate ones). These tensions led to a second metaphor post Brundtland in which a conversation with the Prioritization school (Wang 2004) led to the incorporation the impacts of humans on the natural environment on the belief that sustainability must incorporate, but treat as distinct, environmental, social and economic goals through the "three legged" stool metaphor.

***Solution orientation:*** the Compromise school incorporates, but expands, an emphasis on utility to include, in their own right, environmental, social, and cultural goals (Cashore and Bernstein 2022). Its ethical foundations, highlighted by the Brundtland Report (WCED 1987) are aimed at promoting balance among competing goals and interests through principles of inclusiveness, transparency, accountability, and empowerment (Cashore and Nathan 2020).

***Ethical motivations:*** the compromise school's moral philosophy rests on the belief that when a specific "on the ground" problem comes on the policy agenda it is morally appropriate and fair to engage a range of ideas, interests and stakeholders with diverse values and concerns, including marginalized and vulnerable communities, groups, and people. This school's moral foundations from a rich literature from pluralism to tri-partite corporatism that is devoted to understanding, and building "good governance" at multiple scales through enhancing legitimacy and trust (Dahl 1961a; Rosenbluth and Shapiro 2018; Bodansky 1999; Habermas 1973; Scharpf 1999; March and Olsen 1998). Various stands of this school articulate there mission in specific ways, such as the Lasswellian "policy sciences" community united around the promotion of "human dignity" rather than economic utility (Farr, Hacker, and Kazee 2006). Within sustainability studies, these themes are reflected in a rich set of scholarship aimed at understanding, and assessing, how inclusionary processes and deliberative spaces might foster meaningful involvement of disempowered actors, generate new ideas (Dryzek 1990; Hoberg 1992; Pinkerton 1993), and perhaps improve distributional considerations (Aklin and Mildenberger 2017).

***Dominant disciplines:*** include political science (especially strands on legitimacy, state-society interaction), sociology, psychology, anthropology, economics

***Dominant methodologies:*** for this school require, out of necessity, mixed approaches including of quantitative and qualitative analysis. Special attention has been placed on insights for generating consensus among environment and development "advocacy coalitions" (Sabatier 1988). Applied policy analyses turns to some type of "multi-goal" policy analysis (Weimer and Vining 1992) and stakeholder deliberations to achieve consensus and/or "dispute resolution." Significant research is conducted to assess how representatives of different interests or values might be incorporated that avoids the tendency to drift towards Type 2 (Raymond and DeNardis 2015; Clémençon 2012).

Those scholars in the applied space include turn to "multi-disciplinary" or "interdisciplinary" knowledge generation owing to causal and moral belief that integrating a diversity of perspectives *will* yield the most legitimate and effective policy responses (Nilsson and Weitz 2019a; Saez and Requena 2007; Clark and Wallace 2011). This strand of the compromise school includes an important network interdisciplinary collaborations with natural scientists – including some trained in Ostrom's Indiana workshop – aimed at promoting Bruntdlandesque morality as a *scientific* endeavour (Schmitz 2018; Reed et al. 2019; Matson, Clark, and Andersson 2016; Glaser and Bates 2011). These efforts culminated when the US National Academy of Sciences - whose members strongly bias, and reward, quantitative research- defined and formalized the compromise school's subjective conception of "sustainability science" as "…the interactions between natural and social systems, and with how those interactions affect the challenge of sustainability: meeting the needs of present and future generations while substantially reducing poverty and conserving the planet's life support systems" (Kates 2011, 19449).

This, in turn, would pave the way for many sustainability scholars to present their subjective Type 3 cognitive frames as objective by making universalist claims that their scientific research *found* that sustainability solutions *required* compromise be reached among disparate groups (Jacobsen and Linnell 2016; Grove and Forster 2011; Bryant and Jackson 1999; Baker et al. 2009). Practitioners and policy officials would draw on these conclusions to justify as "scientific" their quest to elaborate the "foundations" (Starik 1995) of "multiple-use" land management (Shands 1988).

These moral frames shape research agendas, including a plethora of mostly large-N quantitative studies in scientific journals including the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, but they would be drawn upon by business interests and associations, such as the World Business Council on Sustainable Development (WBCSD), to champion and fund research and teaching by the compromise and economic optimization schools.

They would also be drawn on, as the owl case reviewed in Part III illustrates, to sparked, and reinforced, a plethora of research into the conditions through multi-stakeholder processes might end the "war in the woods" by collectively defining, and practice "sustainable" resources and forest management (Davis 1992; Breyman 1993; Dietrich 1993; Gup 1990; Hogarth 1991) which was identified as in opposition to "elitist" Type 4 species conservation policies that were bureaucratic, anti-community and, was sometimes asserted, anti-democratic.

A much more subtle, but arguably even more powerful strand of this school was articulated by US and global scholars who, following their concerns about conflicts over debates about land use among environmental activists, indigenous peoples, resource dependent communities, labourers, and businesses sought to understand better the processes through which respectful dialogue might lead to legitimate solutions aimed at avoiding conflict and producing consensus through compromise (see, for example, Halbert and Lee 1990; Wondolleck 1988; Crowfoot and Wondolleck 1991; Bacow and Wheeler 1984; Wilkinson and Anderson 1985; Bingham 1986; Pinkerton 1993; Armitage et al. 2009; Kelly and Alper 1995; Coglianese 1997; Beyers 2001; Brach et al. 2002; Koontz and Thomas 2006).

***Theory building project:*** turns to understanding, or constructing, governance arenas that, through particular ways to foster deliberative decisions making will lead to them being evaluated as so appropriate that its authority is accepted, even if a particular decision (Scharpf 2000a),at any one point is not consistent with what a particular groups or interest would have preferred (March and Olsen 2004). Researchers from this school have found, or posited, that depending on how they are constituted, inclusionary approaches can help foster political legitimacy (Bodansky 1999), public support, and improve policy making (Dryzek 2005; Eckersley 2004; Bernstein 2017; Eckersley 1992). Some strands of this school emphasize how particular engagement might help achieve consensus outcomes (Risse 2000).

***Effectiveness:*** Adherents to the Compromise school assess success as creating some kind of stakeholder inclusionary process that would be required to balance economic, environmental, social and cultural values in ways that produced evaluations of trust, legitimacy and appropriateness of the process (Overdevest and Zeitlin 2016).

***Birds and moles:*** The result was an approach to whack-a-mole effects by striving to balance and compromise across economic, environmental and social goals. However, the school is generally silent on the risks of several external moles. For example, as we will see in Chapter Three, Type 3 stakeholder engagement at domestic and global levels often produce "classic incremental" changes that rarely veer far, and often revert back to, the previous equilibrium. This is often owing to the role of powerful business interests in limiting significant change, while reducing the influence of those whose main objective is to champion environmental values and outcomes (Coglianese 1997). For example, powerful C02 emitting business interests who "…consider climate impacts as harmful but discount them, or consider the costs of climate action as excessive" have been found to be "veto-players" in international climate deliberations (Mitchell and Carpenter 2019, 5). Even when well designed to minimize the role of powerful interests, the compromise school's emphasis on legitimate processes and balance can lead to disastrous consequences for the problem at hand. For example, application of Type 3 multi-stakeholder engagement processes to address overharvesting in the Newfoundland cod fishery a quarter century ago resulted in a compromise decision to allow a harvesting rate higher than what biologists, based on careful attention to the key features of problem at hand, had recommended was required to maintain long-term sustainability (Chase 2003; McKenna 1992). The result was that the Type 1 fisheries economy collapsed, further degrading the Type 4 marine ecology from commercial fishing had already caused (Berrill 1997).

To be sure, decisions from this school can produce moles and synergies. For instance, a deliberative approach to a range of interests can produce greater feelings of trust and inclusion that create "peace dividends" that extend far beyond a particular compromise process (Bunse and McAllister 2022). However, this school risks producing, and even supporting, solutions that are inconsistent with the science of what is required to address a particular "on the ground" problem (Cashore et al. 2019b).

For instance, Victor (2015), thinking about the agreement rather than its effectiveness, adjudicated the Paris Accord as "transformative" for generating support while simultaneously declaring the 1.5/2°C objectives as "ridiculous. Similarly, the Canadian province of Newfoundland invoked a Type 3 reinforcing compromise dialogue to address biologists' warning that its cod fish were being overharvested. These transparent, trustworthy, and legitimate deliberations led to an agreement on catch levels that were *higher than* what biologists projected would be required to maintain long term sustained yields. The result was the catastrophic collapse of Type 1 g cod fishery, and further degrading those concerned about Type 4 ocean ecosystem degradation (Cashore and Bernstein 2022).

##### **iv. Prioritization (Type 4 reinforcing)**

***Problem solving? Yes.*** In contrast, the Prioritization school (Type 4 reinforcing) confronts and interrogates the specific nature of the problem at hand – much the way Ostrom did so for Type 1 problems with her attention to "excludability", this school does the same to understand how, not whether, a particular environmental problem can be solved. For example, my careful attention to this question with Ishani Mukherjee, Lahiru Wijedasa and Altaf Virani, to Peatland, found that a key features was that its key features meant that it was impossible to maintain with irrigation – which would ultimately produce resource collapse (Cashore et al. 2024). Likewise this classification is consistent with those seeking to avoid erosion of hillside streams which the science shows that if policies must conform to the key feature that any number of trees must not be removed (Sabatier and Jenkins-Smith 1993). Hence this school – whether looking at a particular species or the 1.5 degree imperative spends careful time on the nature of the problem, and works inductively, or teleologically, to uncover those key features that would need to be ascertained to effectively manage the problem.

***Utility dominates? No.*** In fact, this school has documented overwhelming evidence corroborating Cashore's Chapter One, that almost all Type 4 problems almost always result from, or are exacerbated by, highly effective Types 3, 2 and 1 policy solutions (Sinden, Kysar, and Driesen 2009; Zeckhauser and Schaefer 1968; Ackerman and Heinzerling 2004).

***Solution orientation:*** confronts "commensurability" biases (Tribe 1972) inherent in the approach of the Commons and Optimization schools to instead, advancing a "sequentialist" approach that ranks "on the ground" problems in order of importance to policy makers and society, rather than turning to cost-benefit or multi-goal policy analysis to make these choices for them (Cashore and Bernstein 2022). Hence, the prioritization school's approach narrows solutions capable of achieving, rather than compromising away, the problem at hand through "fit for purpose" environmental solutions. For example, when it comes to climate they turn to logical causal reasoning by noting that failure to grant the climate and species extinction crises as type 4 challenges risks adopting policy and institutional solutions that that are inconsistent with, or gloss over ecological knowledge: i.e. producing Newfoundlandesque outcomes for the world's most important ecological challenges (IPCC 2018; IPBES 2019).

***Ethical motivations:*** Its moral framework is guided by the belief that some problems are so important that they are incommensurable to others. It draws on rich philosophical and theoretical literatures which reflect on how to distinguish "first order" principles and problem (see, for example, Rawls 1971) from "second order" problems. Tribe (1972, 95) explicitly confronted the "ill fit for purpose" quest of generalizable approaches to policy analysis for first order problems (ibid). The classic example concerns the eradication of slavery in which the very application of economic optimization or compromise approaches as adjudicating frameworks turns analytic attention to assessing, empirically, the pros and cons of owning slaves, which automatically undermines the problem conception and outcome itself: i.e., that no one, for any reason, ought to be allowed to own another human being.

This school was drawn on to understand, and inform, the policy, legislative, and agency reforms during the "first wave of environmentalism" in the 1960s and 1970s (Carson 1962; Paehlke 1992), as well the emergence of international attention on the effects of human activity on the natural environment (Willetts 1996; Meadows et al. 1972a). Tribe offered that leading contenders for Type 4 status, included "…vulnerable or ‘fragile'" problems especially "…ecological balance, unspoiled wilderness, species diversity, and the like…[that are]…are intrinsically incommensurable, in at least some of their salient dimensions, with the human satisfactions…" (Tribe 1972, 96). To be sure, Tribe's point was not that all environmental challenges must be conceived of as Type 4 problems, but that policy analysis techniques should not undermine such a possibility:

> ... it might well be the case that there is no species whose complete preservation should have lexical priority over all human goods; but it simply does not follow that no minimal level (or perhaps some "overall" level) of species survival or diversity should [not] receive lexical priority over at least some kinds of human benefits ...

Tribe offered that it would not “…seem peculiar to insist…that a lower limit be established on especially cruel treatment of animals, whatever the [Type 2] economic gains this cruelty brings to persons in general” (Tribe 1972, 96; parenthesis added). To overcome these commensurability biases, Tribe advocated a “lexical” approach in which the central task of the policy maker is to identify the structural features of the “first order” problem at hand, and then, just Ostrom did for Type 1 commons challenges, inductively identify policies relevant institutional and policy solutions irrespective of “second order” effects (Tribe 1972, 95, 96, 99). Hence, the Prioritization school’s ethical philosophy include the imperative to render explicit hidden conceptions inherent in all policy analyses, and then to consciously, rather than inadvertently, design policies consistent with preferred biases. For these reasons the inherent ethical philosophy behind the Prioritization school is that lower ranked problems—including moles cause by effectively managing higher ranked problems - can only be managed in ways that do not undermine lexical priorities.

**Dominant disciplines:** within sustainability studies, the prioritization school has strong roots going back to critiques by biologists, environmental activists, and environmental agencies who collectively posited, and empirically found, that an emphasis on (Type 1 or 2) economic utility tended to be correlated with the degradation of the structure and function of ecosystems and species extinctions (Taylor 1992). It also has strong roots within historically oriented political science, sociology and environmental studies and humanities who, by standing back and viewing trends over decades have been able to view “the forest for the trees” (or perhaps the lack of forests ☹) in ways that more ahistorical leaning disciplines have failed to uncover.

**Dominant methodologies:** the prioritization school is most certainly motivated by largely quantitative data, reinforced by extensive field research, that led scientists to alert the world about the ecological crisis at hand (Kütting 2000). It places careful attention on what scientific evidence indicates is required to avoid, or reverse, the effects of humans in general, and commodification of nature in particular, on terrestrial, marine and atmospheric ecological systems. This task requires understanding, and disentangling scientific evidence about the shorter “shelf life” of land-use caused climate change emissions that also threaten biodiversity, from longer term emissions caused by carbon dependent industrialization processes. Members of this school are also keenly aware of the need to avoid conflating data collected by Type 1 commons scholars on “extent of forest cover” or “tree density” from data on the decline of ecosystem structure and function and species extinction risks.

However, what is important for this book is that while prioritization scholars are motivated by ameliorating problems that became known through ecological sciences applying largely quantitative methods, they also recognize that, for instrumental reasons, effective policy and institutional solutions require sophisticated training in qualitative methods. This is owing to the recognition Type 4 environmental problems – such as the massive species extinctions and climate crisis – are overwhelmed in political and policy processes that emphasize Types 3, 2 and 1 short-term or material interests (Lockwood et al. 2017; Levin et al. 2012). Hence, the prioritization school must always embrace methods best suited to identifying “critical juncture” policy designs capable of ameliorating, or avoiding, the problem in question (Jordan and Moore 2020). This is because Type 4 environmental problems – such as the massive species extinctions and climate crisis – are overwhelmed in political and policy processes that emphasize Types 3, 2 and 1 short-term or material interests (Lockwood et al. 2017; Levin et al. 2012). An emphasis on critical junctures has led prioritization scholars to draw on path dependency analysis as an innovative way to think about the triggers of transformative change pathways (Peters and Tarpey 2019; Hacker and Pierson 2014). In contrast to the economic optimization school that views path dependency as inefficient or utility undermining (North 1990; David 1985), prioritization scholars embrace path dependency processes to think about how to change policy outcomes, values, and feasibility calculations (Lockwood et al. 2017; Pierson 1993; Hacker 2001). Specific techniques include qualitative “process tracing” and “applied forward reasoning” (Bernstein 2000) with which to project forward multiple unfolding causal steps resulting from a particular critical juncture.

Political science research has identified at least two distinct ways in which critical junctures might be triggered: societal and stakeholder conflict¹ on the one hand, and innovative “policy mixes” on the other hand (Howlett 2019c; Peters et al. 2018). The former process cautions political scientists who advocate for stakeholder and intergovernmental processes to be mindful not to inadvertently make decisions that undermines productive societal conflict through the creation of “decoy” deliberative bodies that undermine contestation required for more significant transformations (Dimitrov 2019). The latter turns analytic attention not only to the goals of policy, but the way in which specific calibrations that dictate resources and approaches to compliance, or the specific policy settings that determine behavioural changes, matter not only for identifying micro level “easy to pull”, but “hard to reverse” policy levers capable of producing, over a series of steps, desired results.

Given the impossibility of developing generalizable theories about the myriad of possible policy triggers that might be uncovered, this school champions the development of diagnostic design questions with which to guide inductive deliberative exercises for generating policy innovations (Levin et al. 2012; Young 2019). For these reasons prioritization scholars (Hildén, Jordan, and Huitema 2017) caution against the dominance of “experimentalist” policy designs favoured by many self-labelled “data-driven” “empirical social scientists” (Cole 2015) because evidence of transformative effects appears far too late to inform policy design. They are particularly concerned that large-N experimentalist approaches, and learning that results, tend to implicitly bias Types 1, 2 and 3 because empirical evidence for these problems is much more likely to appear within weeks or months following the intervention at hand. It is, arguably for these reasons that climate focused learning experiments tend to focus on human adaptations to, rather than lessons for mitigating, Type 4 environmental changes (e.g. Armitage et al. 2009).

For these reasons, the prioritization school requires significant expertise and training in conceptual and reflexive analysis, as well as comparative policy studies, with which to foster inductively generated policy designs (Howlett and Cashore 2009; Howlett 2019b). Owing to concerns of biasing a quest for (Type 2 and 3) universalist theories, quantitative empirical analyses play an important but secondary role in the search for policy designs capable of identifying change levers. It is for these reasons ironic, if not tragic, that GTC and subsequent meta reviews on theories of the policy process championed by Sabatier (Sabatier 1999) and (Ostrom 1999) ignored or dismissed historical institutionalist scholarship precisely because it did not seek generalizable frameworks (Sabatier 1999, 5).

***Theory building project:*** this school turns to two distinct ways in which critical junctures might be triggered: societal and stakeholder conflict¹⁰ on the one hand, and innovative “policy mixes” on the other hand (Howlett 2019b). The latter turns analytic attention not only to the goals of policy, but the way in which specific calibrations that dictate resources and approaches to compliance, or the specific policy settings that determine behavioural changes, can identify “easy to pull” micro level levers capable of producing, over a series of steps, desired results. While these methods are certainly advanced in some strands of policy sciences, they are, as I argue in the introduction to this book, the required analytical capacities to achieve these outcomes are poorly tended to, and with few resources deployed, compared to the enormous set of resources deployed to “double down” and advance Type 3, 2 and 1 reinforcing methods. It is for these reasons that the last half of this book carefully walks us through how to build analytical capacities for integrating the complete range of causal knowledge for advancing Type 4 policy pathways.

***Effectiveness:*** for all these reasons the Common’s school is anchored in achieving desired policy objectives facing a clearly specified, and measurable, “on the ground” challenge whether it is about maintaining the long-term supply of utility enhancing fish for a poverty stricken community, timber management in 1000s of forest dependent communities across India, or long term supplies of clean water facing local urban areas, there is no success, and no sense of accomplishment, if the specified issue at hand becomes degraded or collapsed. This is important because its attention on revisiting theories and prescriptions if they don’t cause the resource good to be maintained (rather than simply managing degradation more slowly) is not only a critically important aspect of this School for Sustainability scholarship policy and governance, its approach to “on the ground” effectiveness in managing the particular Type 1 problem at hand, can, and must, be emulated by Type 4 problems that consumer the interest, and attention, of the Prioritization school.

***Birds and moles:*** the prioritization school recognizes that its sequentialist morality can create “collateral damage” moles. This has led to a critique that ranking environmental problems as highest on the pecking order is “elitist” (Farrell 2020) and even undermines the sustainable development of some of the world’s most poor and vulnerable populations, including indigenous communities and rural livelihoods. However, prioritization school scholars respond it is often possible to grant lexical ordering to the environment that can, indeed, subsequently ameliorate social and cultural challenges (Clapp and Dauvergne 2005), just not in the way envisioned by economic optimization or compromise schools that, in so many cases, result in “lose/lose” undermining outcomes for ecosystems and local cultural traditions (McAfee 1999). While the prioritization school within sustainability studies has thought carefully about how to handle external moles, it has largely failed to explicitly assess the problem of internal moles: i.e., how to conceive of the range of Type 4 problems with which to grant lexical status. Intriguingly, GTC called for such thinking, arguing that while biological and ecological systems were different from those covered in GTC, they, too, could be enhanced by similar inductive attention to the features of the problem at hand species (Ostrom 1990, 25-26).

Armed with this disentangling of the 4PTs, the two foundational questions, the four types that emerge across all problem areas, and the way they have been reinforced in the areas of environment and sustainability through four distinct schools, we are now in a position to empirical assess my argument developed in the introduction about the slow and steady drift away from conceiving of, and developing solutions for, the triplet environmental crises of climate, biodiversity and forests as Type 4 problems.

> Table 1.3: Four schools of Sustainability thought and practice: key features

| | Commons | Optimization | Compromise | Prioritization |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Utility?** | Yes | Yes | No | No |
| **Problem solving?** | Yes | No | No | Yes |
| **Solution orientation** | long-term sustained extraction | maximizing aggregate utility (social welfare, satisfactions) | promoting balance among competing values, goals and interests | “sequentialist” approach that ranks “on the ground” problems in order of importance to policy makers and society |
| **Ethical motivations** | avoid devastating effects of resource collapse | utilitarian principles of “the greatest good for the greatest number in the long run” | good governance, legitimacy | “first order” principles |
| **Dominant disciplines** | economics with supporting roles from geography, sociologically and anthropology | economics, rational and public choice political scientists, international relations scholars including neo-realists (emphasizing relative gains) and neo-liberal institutionalist (emphasizing absolute gains). | include political science (especially strands on legitimacy, state-society interaction), sociology, psychology, anthropology, economics | historically oriented political science, sociology, law, environmental studies and humanities |
| **Dominant methodologies** | game theoretic quantitative models, supporting role for qualitative ethnographic methods | quantitative econometrics modelling and game theoretic analyses. | mixed approaches including of quantitative and qualitative analysis. Multi-disciplinary | while informed by knowledge from quantitative ecology, it emphasizes "critical juncture" interventions |
| **Theory building project** | long-term *economic viability* of resources | *universal theory of individual, organizational and state preferences* | source of political legitimacy/ appropriateness | the sources of durable policy interventions |
| **Approach to effectiveness** | avoiding resource collapse | enhancing aggregate utility whether or not problem is solved | consensus | policy objective must be achieved |
| **Approach to birds and moles** | attempts to build internal birds, ignores external moles | converts both to utility equivalents; silent on external effects | incorporates through compromise, silent on external effects | identifies first order moles, does not rely on birds |