# The Coding Task

***This codebook develops a systematic and standardized way to classify qualitative documents into one of Cashore’s four problem types(4PT) framework*** . It will do so by providing guidance to coders on how to assign Type 1, 2, 3 or 4 status to qualitative text including, but not limited to, peer reviewed journal articles, course syllabi, policy statements, policy analyses, media communications and policy recommendations. This classification effort complements, rather than replaces, careful qualitative application
of the framework required for uncovering important nuances through deliberative analysis and reflection of highly complex text. ***What the quantitative coding effort does well is to generate useful knowledge about whether the overall patterns identified by an one study or set of studies compare to other cases outside of the study. Coding also permits assessments as to whether there are differences in the dominance of one or more problem types across time and also space – be they countries, organizations, or sectors.***

Hence, not only can a well-developed code book generate descriptions about a range of policy and governance outcomes, it will also allow for broadening epistemological and methodological techniques that might explain variation – such as the correlation between the kind of disciplinary, sub-disciplinary and interdisciplinary training experts received that shape their bias in emphasizing one Type over the other. This in turn, might help generate knowledge about, and reverse when desired, “unconscious bias” about the way policy scholars and practitioners conceive of, and measure, “on the ground” problems. In other words, this framework can help advance “fit for purpose” policy analysis.

To be clear: unlike Cashore’s broader argument about the drift away from Type 4 problems that he has, and is, applying to understand their role in shaping sustainability policy and governance over the last 35 years, the code book is designed to describe a range of outcomes, to which Cashore and his collaborators, and anyone else for that matter, can better assess, test, and develop their own arguments and theories. In short, the code book, paves the way for, but does not take a position on, which of the four problem types is preferred nor the causes of changes in emphasis of the Types.

Importantly, although the 4PT distinctions originally came out of Cashore’s work on global, transnational and local approaches to sustainability policy and governance, they can be applied to disentangle how any kind of problem facing society and policy making are analysed, and treated, by scholars and experts. This means that ***while Cashore applies and draws examples from sustainability policy scholarship and practice, the framework is equally useful for anyone working on problem focused policy analysis including, but not limited to those scholars working in schools of public health, education, social work, forestry, fisheries, natural resources, agriculture, and even mining and energy for that
matter.*** Having said this, the guidance and examples below for coders to
be able to render concrete important but sometimes abstract distinctions, draw on examples from five years of efforts to code sustainability policy and governance analyses.

This code book proceeds in the following steps. First, we discuss Cashore’s “utility” and “problem solving” labels as the two key distinctions that position the 4PT framework. Second, we review Cashore’s four key schools of sustainability thought and practice – including notable strands within them – to show how each of these 4PTs are subtly nurtured by sophisticated scholarly communities. Third, we review the challenges facing coding of different kinds of qualitative documents. Fourth, we review different sorting challenges based on the kinds of document being including abstracts of course syllabi, journal articles. Fifth we offer solutions to each including reviewing of our protocol for sorting scholarly articles through careful qualitative analysis that has been developed and revised over the last five years.  We then review our approach to coding course syllabi and the development of key words to facilitate swift coding of a range of documents. We then discuss our systematic efforts to advance AI assisted coding with the goal of producing systematic text analysis that would be consistent with the laborious human coding efforts of the last six years (i.e. we seek to achieve intercoder reliability between AI and humans .8 or better). We conclude by offering
recommendations on next steps for both Cashore’s team and collaborators, as well as those who might want to apply the 4PT framework beyond sustainability policy and governance considerations. Appendices A reviews our approach to coding articles beyond the two distinctions as a way to generate propositions about preliminary explanations for results and Appendix B which provides examples from cases with which to assist in sorting initially “ambiguous” cases.

## a) Key Distinctions: Utility and Problem Solving Orientations

The specific coding task appears at first glance seems quite straightforward i.e. to distinguish whether scholarly and practitioner policy analyses emphasise, or not, “utility” and “problem solving” orientations (Table 1).

| Table1: The Four Problem Types (4PT)<br />Simplified Distinctions | Utility Dominates? YES | Utility Dominates? No |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | --------------------- |
| **Problem Solving Dominates? YES**                          | TYPE 1                 | TYPE 4                |
| **Problem Solving Dominates? NO**                           | TYPE 2                 | TYPE 3                |

These two distinctions originally emerged from Cashore’s reflections, individually and with colleagues, about why so many sustainability policy experts have disagreed for over 35 years about how to think about, and also manage, critical environmental challenges facing the planet highlighted by climate, biodiversity and forest degradation. (Again, while derived from the sustainability policy and governance cases, the 4PT distinctions are meant to be applied to any “on the ground” problems facing policy makers and society including health care, education, child care, education and so on).

The origins of the 4PT distinctions followed Cashore’s  recognition, having only worked in interdisciplinary forestry, environment and policy schools, that longstanding largely unconscious biases among himself, his colleagues, and experts generally, about how to study the world of sustainability policy and governance, helped explain longstanding debates about not only about how to conceive of, and measure, sustainability challenges, but also recommended courses of policy action for managing the environment, including climate, species extinctions, biodiversity loss, as well as forests and natural resources management.

What Cashore noticed was two key divides within these debates. ***The first distinction*** was whether sustainability scholars and practitioners believed that enhancing **“utility”** outcomes was the key task facing sustainability policy analysis. He noted that a large group of scholars generally felt that the more utility was enhanced, the better off society will be. While this causal belief is widely diffused among a range of analysts, it is also hotly debated by scholars and analysts who either oppose utility as a guiding orientation, and/or seek other ways to frame desired outcomes. Hence, Cashore recognized that the belief that utility enhancement was the preferable, from those that did not, was an excellent way to distinguish sustainability policy and governance analyses.

***Cashore’s second distinction*** came from his recognition that while some narrowed their conclusion to assessing how to solve or effectively manage the clearly specified problem at hand- such as such as saving a particular species from extinction, avoiding resource collapse of a specified fish stock, or limiting warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels – others brought in analytical frames that allowed for a deliberations over not only how, but ***whether*** the problem at hand could or should be solved.  That is, this latter group applied adjudicating frameworks that were developed as a way to address ***any*** particular problem – regardless as to its unique features - that might find its way to the societal or policy agenda in mind. Rather than generating research and analysis to shed light on how to manage a specific policy challenge, this group was united by developing frameworks that allow for consideration of not acting at all, or acting in a way that does not effectively manage the problem at hand.

## b) Conceptual Foundations: Utility and Problem Contingent Labels

While these distinctions showed great promise, the next task was to elaborate their meanings so that their influence could be better identified and assessed.

### The utility label covers a broad range

Cashore’s 4PT framework notes that the term “utility” is generally applied and defined broadly. It includes for example, those trained in welfare economics who, largely focusing on income or economic growth, convert others outcomes to “utility equivalents” in order to monetize, and compare, human preferences for green space and nature, with their direct interest in generating income. The term “utility” also incorporates the broader philosophy of “utilitarianism” that seeks to advance outcomes that produce the “greatest good for the greatest number in the long run”. It is also used more generally as a term to discuss whether, in terms of enhancing individual or collection satisfactions, there is any “utility” in a proposed course of action?

For Cashore, the rationale for use of “utility” as a label was that it best captures the general belief behind a range of analyses that their goal is to improve “**human satisfactions”.** This is an important clarification because the utility as a term has a decidedly anthropogenetic orientation in which policy is geared towards improving the interests of humans either today or in the future. This, in turn, is shaped by some kind of homage and widespread work developing theories relevant to unpacking human  **“self-interest”** .What is important for coding on the 4PT framework is that the concern itself is what is important – i.e. **the utility label in the 4PT framework is shorthand to capture those who are motivated to advance human self-interested satisfactions that incorporate a range of more specific satisfaction seeking rationales**

This orientation in turn, allows coders to identify efforts to promote and understand **self-interested behaviours at multiple levels** of sustainability policy and governance including individual, organizational, nation state decisions as well as those within international governance arenas and global governance agreements. Hence, the utility label includes, for coding purposes, analyses focused on aggregating **individual utility** , **organizational utility** (such as companies returning shareholder value), or even **states’ utility** by maximizing their own self-interested preferences. This category incorporates, rather than distinguishes, longstanding debates among neo-realist and neo-liberal institutionalist scholars within international relations about whether self-interested, utility chasing states, are motivated to achieve relative or absolute gains. (The 4PT framework notes that debates about relative or absolute gains have undermine the similar quest to advance utility seeking interests, including, at the state level, relying on some conception of “national interest” that improves the satisfaction of its population through some kind of beneficial “rational” outcome.

**Hence, this broad use of the utility label focuses coders on identifying any kind of analysis that is motivated by enhancing human satisfaction through self-interested preference maximization** . This allows coders to capture in one category a range of scholarship and analysis that although diverse and nuanced, are united by their underlying orientation in emphasizing individual, organizational and state based preferences that pay homage to improving human “satisfactions” at multiple levels.

### The problem solving label: distinguishing analyses that target “how”, not “whether”

---

The term “problem solving” is also used broadly to capture a range of expertise and approaches that undertake research with which to solve or effectively manage a particular “on the ground” problem. That is, they eschew asking “whether” a problem can be effectively managed, and instead ask, given the problem at hand, how can it be effectively managed?

This category then incorporates a broad group of scholars and analysts who are united in their quest to understand and effectively management an “on the ground” problem such as the extinction of a particular species or limiting warming to no more than 1.5/2 °C above pre-industrial levels promoted through the Paris Accord. This means that the analyses they bring, and conclusions they make, will go back to implications for generating knowledge useful for problem solving of a problem, or a class of problems. Similarly, these analysts will never apply universal pre-established theories to assess whether the problem at hand ***ought*** to be solved. This is not their interest. Likewise while their research may carry lessons for other problems, they do not seek to generate universal theories that can be applied to any kind of problem.

Put another way, this group of scholars would, for these reasons, avoid any quest for developing a theoretical orientation, or set of recommendations, that went beyond the problem or class of problems from which their research was derived. The practical result is that many in this category tend to carefully assess problem structure or “key features of the problem” they are attempting to shed light on how to better manage or solve.

This is important. The reason they eschew any effort to develop a universal way to address any problem is because, by disconnecting from problem structure, the approach applied elsewhere might not effectively manage or solve another class of problems – i.e. it might even make those worse off. This means that they are largely conducting research in which its lessons are “problem contingent”.  Any effort to generate lessons beyond a class
of problems that is offered as a way to think about, and manage, all problems, is evidence that a scholarly analysis is not in this category. More specifically, any effort that concludes it is not “feasible” or “rational” to address a particular problem at hand that draws on a pre-established theory or framework that that was developed to analyse any and all problem is outside of this sorting category.

This elaboration leads to the identification of a more nuanced table of which human and AI coders must be aware. Coders will note that I have also changed the Y axis label to “problem contingent” which I treat as synonymous as “problem solving” dominates, but also more useful for coding purposes. I keep the broader term in the first table as it is more accessible to the uninitiated coder, while bringing in the more specific term once they have read these first few overview pages.

| Table 2: The Four Problem Types<br />Expanded Distinctions                                                                                                                                                              | Utility dominates: Does the analysis, conclusions, and theories treat individuals, organizations and states as largely self-interested, satisfaction driven entities that seek some kind “utility enhancing” outcome? YES | Utility dominates: Does the analysis, conclusions, and theories treat individuals, organizations and states as largely self-interested, satisfaction driven entities that seek some kind “utility enhancing” outcome? NO |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Problem contingent: Is the analysis, conclusions, and theories generated from, and narrowed to, understanding, improving, or solving, a clearly specified “on the ground” problem or class of problems? YES** | TYPE 1 Utility / Contingent                                                                                                                                                                                                 | TYPE 4 Not Utility / Contingent                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| **Problem contingent: Is the analysis, conclusions, and theories generated from, and narrowed to, understanding, improving, or solving, a clearly specified “on the ground” problem or class of problems? NO**  | TYPE 2 Utility / Not Problem Contingent (Universal)                                                                                                                                                                         | TYPE 3 Not Utility / Not Problem Contingent (Universal)                                                                                                                                                                    |

In sum, at the risk of repetition, let me be clear: these frameworks offer ways to deliberate over ***not only how, but whether, a specific problem can be effectively managed given a broader set of considerations beyond the problem*** itself.

## C) Examples of Not Problem Contingent (Universal Approaches)

As I discuss below I refer to the major strand of Optimization school of sustainability thought
and practice known as “cost-benefit analysis” (CBA) as a leading example of this approach. This is because CBA frameworks assesses whether or not a policy intervention governing a particular problem will be able to produce, or not, aggregate utility benefits. Under this approach, if policy designers cannot find an intervention to address a problem at hand that will enhance overall utility
(i.e. possible policy interventions are all deemed to undermine aggregate utility) then the “rational” answer from this CBA approach is not to act.

There are, to be sure, many other strands of the Optimization school. For example, within
international relations, both neo-realist and neo-liberal international relations scholars seek to generate theories of state preference, including longstanding debates about whether states maximize their preferences owing to absolute or relative gains. What is important for the 4PT framework is not their debates about underlying motivations that shape a given state’s
“self-interest” preferences, but that both neo-realist and neo-liberal institutionalist scholars develop their theories and frameworks to explain  ***state behaviour in general*** – i.e. they seek universal understandings of utility chasing state preference that explain, but are not derived from, their choices about how to manage a specified problem. That is, they develop and
apply theories of state preferences that apply beyond a particular problem, but are meant to explain state behaviour over a particular problem. To repeat, their project is to develop universal theories of state action that are not derived from, or limited to, any specific problem or issue states happen to be deliberating over. These theories of state action also inform recommendations from these scholar about how states might act go address a specific problem in order to better achieve their pre-existing self-interested preferences (i.e. how to “optimize” outcomes given existing understandings of state preferences). This is why, as I discuss below, so many IR scholars make the case for addressing the global climate crisis based on the argument that doing so will advance state preferences, rather than asking whether a theory of state preferences is the most useful way to think about, and manage, particular kinds of problems.  This same dilemma facing cost-benefit scholars who so believe in the utility enhancing motivations that they constantly argue, and work so hard to demonstrate – even despite overwhelming
evidence to the contrary – that an emphasis on the utility undermining effects of the climate crisis is the most useful way to conceive of, and develop policy options for, averting global warming.

As I discuss below, strands within the “Compromise School” of sustainability thought and practice are also replete with a range of efforts to develop universal theories of stakeholder engagement, legitimacy formation, and conflict resolution that, while rejecting utility chasing theories, nonetheless also develop frameworks for understanding motivations of individuals, organizations and states, that are also developed to understand, and prescribe solutions for, a range of problems that may come across the desk of policy officials. For example, there is one strand of the Compromise school known as “alternative dispute resolution” ADR that offers a way for stakeholder to agree on litigation avoiding natural resources management agreements that draws on universal theories of individual and organization behaviour as a way foster a compromise
agreement among disparate interests. While drawing on theories that extend far beyond, and reject, utility motivations as far to narrow an approach to human behaviour, they share the same mission in developing university theories as a way to generate an understanding about not only how, but whether, the “on the ground” issue, or set of issues, can be resolved given the overall focus on conflict resolution rather than solving and effectively managing, the “on the ground” problem that spark the ADR in the first place.

Another stand of the compromise school has been nurtured by those studying philosophy which
seeks to generate a set of norms and protocols for making difficult decisions – such as whether to save someone stopped on the train tracks that might risk the lives of many on the train. In these cases, pre-existing approaches for developing normative theory based protocols for doing so – not based on utility per se but on claims to higher level “ethics” are turned to as a way to have society and policy makers thinks about managing difficult questions – from species extinctions that results from enhancing economic growth – to saving lives during a pandemic when the isolationist policies for doing say may undermine children’s cognitive development. In these cases what is important for the 4PT framework is that the adjudicating analysis that result are meant to help policy makers and society make decisions to address any problem that might come along, and are not derived, narrowed to, or contingent, on a particular class of problems.

## d) Examples of Problem Contingent Approaches (Not Universal)

In contrast, and as I elaborate below, members of Commons and Prioritization schools narrowing
that adjudicating frameworks to only address, and are indeed derived from, a particular “on the ground” problem or class of problems – whether it be for utility enhancing (Commons) or non-utility (Prioritization) motivations. There are many strands within each of these schools that reinforce “problem contingent” rather than non-problem contingent universal (i.e.. meant to be applied to any problems)  frameworks. As I discuss below the most famous utility seeking, problem contingent strand within sustainability studies are those seeking to understand, and effectively manage, “tragedies of the commons” that, if not well managed, produce avoidable
resource collapse. Here, scholars seek to understand key features of the problem – such as Ostrom’s fundamental point that some commons tragedies – such as fish that swim - cannot be served by “excluding” access – and hence require different solutions to effectively manage them. The point for the “problem contingent” classification here is that scholars like Ostrom and her students who focus on “non-excludable” tragedies, only develop theories and approaches based on these key features. That is, they do not research, and have little to say, problems that do not share these key features.

There are many likeminded strands about developing problem contingent approaches by those who do not share the Common’s utility orientation, but do share is focus on how to effectively manage specified “on the ground” problems – i.e. they eschew considerations about “whether” a specified problem can be solved, to deliberating over how it can solved or effectively managed. For example, Tribe’s work on species extinctions rejected analytical universal approaches offered by extant “policy sciences” framework, to show how any consideration to saving a particular species must begin, and end, based on the knowledge about what kind of conservation efforts is required to maintain the viability of that species. While Tribe and others like him turned to debates in philosophy and the study of “ethics”, he rejected as problematic any effort to address species extinctions that might produce an outcome that caused species extinctions. Hence universal adjudicating frames about particular protocols for assessing policy dilemmas – based on universal theories of “ethics”, was in fact, highly unethical. Others in this line of thinking within international relations have pointed to the “on the ground” problem of slavery. For this group, like species
extinctions, the only way to eradicate slavery to develop policies and interventions based on achieving no-slavery. The idea of applying cost-benefitanalysis, or alternative dispute resolution, to assessing not only how, but whether, slavery can be eradicated is anathema to this strands of the prioritization school because it opens the door to consider policy options in which slavery might continue. Hence for these scholars, adjudicating frameworks are always derived from knowledge to manage a specified problems (or class of problems with similar structural features and attributes, such as Ostrom’s non-excludability tragedies). These distinctions have led Cashore to elaborate four categories  to include these broader distinctions (Table 2) in which we can now further narrow “problem solving” to “problem contingent” which more accurately labels theories and frameworks and course of action that are never meant to be universal, but only applicable to a class of problems

## e) Examples of the Resulting Four Problem Types (4PT)

Now that we have covered how the 4PT framework defines utility and problem solving distinctions, and reviewed examples of universal versus problem contingent approaches, we are now in a position to identify examples of approaches classified within each: Type 1 (utility, problem contingent); Type 2 (utility, not problem contingent); Type 3 (not utility, not problem contingent); Type 4 (not utility, problem contingent). This section will, out of necessity, repeat some of the examples above. This is by design: repetition of examples will provide clarity when the same ones are used to distinguish different parts of the classification framework. In addition, this part is important since the coding is focused on the resulting four distinctions – so understanding how the above review figures for making decision about where to place a range of literatures is greatly facilitated by giving these concrete examples.  This review, in turn, paves the way for a broader discussion of four key schools of sustainability that reinforce, but are also much broader, than the 4PTs. While broader, inclusion of discussion of the schools is expected to generate knowledge that will facilitate and enhance and generate a nuanced approach to
coding the 4PTs.

### i. Type 1: Utility Dominates, Problem Contingent

**Type 1** then sorts those that are motivated by utility chasing orientations, but narrow their focus to a specified “on the ground” problem that is seen as undermining utility enhancement. Those scholars that are sorted into this category seek to generate analyses and ideas for intervening that improve utility outcomes for that problem. These approaches target the problem or class of problems they seek to ameliorate.  Their interest is not in developing universal theories to address any and all sustainability problems. This means that they generate recommendations and analyses based on their problem or class of problems in isolation from other problems that might have different features. And they certainly would never apply a theoretical or analytical framework to discuss whether the problem should be solved.

There are countless examples of this kind of orientation. For example, I have a colleague who studies the issue of taxis idling looking for riders in downtown Singapore when it appears that they would make more income (utility) by driving to the airport. This problem then can be solved by reducing “information asymmetry” though some kind of intervention – such as advertising or sharing this knowledge, or through some kind of regulation reducing an ability to idle. In this case, interventions are adjudicated only for their ability to manage that particular problem  - regardless as to the possible effects of the “effective policy intervention” in reducing overall aggregate utility – such as those case in which limited government resources are better placed on managing another problem that would lead to higher utility.

As I discussed above and elaborate below Type 1 sorting would also include a large group of scholars and practitioners working on “collective action theory” in general, and its application to sustainability through the “tragedy of the commons metaphor” in particular. This is an important distinction. Collective Action theorists are motivate by eliminating utility undermining outcomes such as rubber necking on highways, hording of toilet paper during pandemics, or over harvesting that leads to collapse of fish stocks or water supplies. These approaches, which draw on the classic “prisoners dilemma” in which, in the absence of an ability to develop and comply with, a collective agreements, two prisoners in different cells both have a “self-interest” to confess because if they do not, but their partner in crime does, they will be handed a much higher and longer prison sentence. This “confessing/confessing” strategy is considered to the most effective utility enhancing approach given no collective agreement (an outcome known as the “Nash equilibrium) but it is not the most utility enhancing solution. The most utility enhancing solution is for both not to confess, as this will lead to lower prison sentences overall. In this case, the issue then is how to build and design collective action institutions to allow for both not to confess. In the sustainability world, the issue then is how to build and design collective action institutions such that harvesting of the resource in question is less than or equal to the biological rate or reproduction.

In all these cases, analyses are focused on human satisfactions, but only around the specific problem in question. As I discussed above and in more detail below, Elinor Ostrom’s path to earning the Nobel prize in economics was sparked by her recognition that for some utility undermining tragedies, highlighted by fish, excludability was not possible. This mean that traditional interventions to solve this utility undermining commons tragedies that turned to private property or state ownership, and that assumed excludability was possible, were ill suited to addressing those utility undermining resource depletion tragedies. Ostrom then turned to assessing how to effectively manage these “common pool resources” (CPRs) which she posited were better addressed through local resource governing innovations.

The point for coders here is that all of these efforts paid attention to the key features of the problem at hand – specifically those contextual and contingent factors that explained the particular utility undermining outcome for the problem at hand. Collective action theorists in general, and commons tragedy scholars in particular, only generalize based on the specific problem at hand, or a class of problems such as those commons tragedies in which excludability is not possible. They would never therefore apply their lessons to managing all problems nor bringing in an assessment as to whether the problem can be solved. They only look at the how to do so, not whether.

### ii. Type 2: Utility Dominates, Not Problem Contingent (Universal)

In contrast, **Type 2** literatures share an interest in understanding and championing utility seeking preferences, but they reject a focus that only includes attention to the specific problem at hand. The logic behind this, whether CBA that targets and aggregates individual preferences, or IR theories that target and aggregate state preferences, is that that group believes that it is unwise to assess policy options for ameliorating a specified problem without considering, and finding a way to incorporate, the result of this decision on other kinds of problems. Their logic is clear: if solving or effectively managing one specific kind of utility undermining activity – such as say, over harvesting timber – results in a set of policy and governance decisions that might preclude more lucrative activities – such as say the introduction of copper mining and its promise of increase wages – then policy officials have undermined their responsibilities in managing for the greatest amount of utility with which to benefit the welfare of citizens.

This category also captures the IR scholars above who also seek to generalize about the processes through which states do, or should, maximizing their preferences – often in the name of the “national interest”- that are then applied to assess how – and sometimes even whether – the problem at hand can be effectively managed given state preferences. Hence those analysts that turn to state preferences as a way to think about how to manage and develop policy response – whether it be, as discussed below, Nordhaus’ reasoning that optimal state responses to the utility undermining impacts of the climate crisis will produce a 3.2 degree world – in contrast to the 1.5 outcome a problem contingent approach of the IPCC. It also applied, as discussed below, to neo-liberal institutionalist Keohane whose climate research turns to his theory of state preferences for policy solutions, rather than interrogating the contingent nature of the climate crisis itself.

Hence whether CBA, or conflict resolution or a host of other likeminded approaches, Type 4 classifies those analytical approaches that are not offered as contingent on solving a particular problem but as a way to adjudicate the problem at hand by apply a universal way to think about, measure, and identify, and project policy interventions. Hence, these approach there expands consideration, and offering a framework for doing so, about whether the problem at hand **can, or should,** be effectively managed based on some kind of approach to preference formation.

### iii. Type 3: Utility Does Not Dominate, Not Problem Contingent (Universal)

There are many diverse approaches that are nonetheless united by their  **Type 3 status** : i.e. analytical frames for understanding, explaining and prescribing policy actions that generate protocols for doing so that eschew utility motivations as a dominant force or outcome, and instead reflect on a diverse set of motivations with which to understand, and prescribe courses of action. These approaches are united by rejecting the treatment of non-utility outcomes as “irrational” and instead wonder how to understand and incorporate cultural values, social practices, environmental norms, that produce some kind of way to both understand the world and also provide the basis for recommendations about how to include a diverse set of ideas, organizations that generate legitimate process and wide accepted outcomes. As reviewed above when discussing universal approaches, while they reject utility as a dominant motivation, they share the idea that pre-existing theories and frameworks can be applied to adjudicate not only how, but whether, a particular problem can be solved. In other words, with these approaches – whether originating from a particular set of ethical frames in philosophy, sociology, geography or critical theory, one never knows for sure whether applying a particular one of these approaches to a particular problem will result in the problem at hand being solved or effectively managed. In other words, in contrast to the teleological orientation of Types 1 and 4, Type 3 approaches work from a preexisting framework – or develop a framework from a case that is meant to apply to any chase – rather than developing a framework that only pertains to that problem or class of problems.

### iv. Type 4: Utility Does Not Dominate, Problem Contingent

For these reasons **Type 4** frameworks are distinguished, like Type 1, on their ability to help understand, and ameliorate, a specified problem from the Paris Accord’s 1.5/2 degree objectives, to a particular species being threatened with extinction. However unlike Type 1 reinforcing approaches, Type 4 problems not only reject utility as the guiding force, they usually find that when those chasing utility outcomes are effective, they usually cause, or exacerbate, a range of Type 4 problems. The classic example comes to us from the identification of two distinct problems that are outside of the sustainability challenges to which Cashore devoted his empirical work. The first problem is that of slavery – i.e. the act of one human having property rights over another human being – i.e. “owning” them. A range of scholarly analyses assessing this problem have found that the only way to ensure slavery is dramatically reduced or eradicated is to begin, and end, with the required outcome: i.e. no one, for any reason, is allowed to own another person. Many apply relevant frameworks have not only found that (Type 1 and 2) utility chasing motivations was behind slavery in the first place, but that application of Type 3, 2 frames permits deliberations over whether slavery ought to be considered – which, by definition, undermines an ability to achieve the desired outcome. The second example is anti-colonial norms in which reducing or averting an attempt by one country to take over another can only be achieved by teleological approaches that beginning, and end, with the absence of colonialism. Scholarly analysis reinforcing Type 4 hence would reject neo-liberal and neo-realist IR theories as permitting an understanding of state preferences that could also consider colonial type behaviours, rather than assessing mechanisms for ensuring these possibilities are never considered. As I discuss below, a number of analytical frames within environmental studies are consistent with Type 4 reasoning.

## f) Coding Challenges

The above review will most certainly facilitate, and place in context, efforts to code qualitative documents against the 4PTs. This facilitates, rather than overcomes, several challenges that a code book must incorporate. First, while some documents may seem straightforward, others may provide a nuanced or even contradictory account that makes sorting more challenging. The solution to this is to provide, and justify, systematic protocols to facilitate sorting of what we refer to as “ambiguous” cases below. Second, different types of documents will need slightly different ways to disentangle the 4PTs. For example, our careful review of journal articles on sustainability policy and governance requires laborious coding of highly complex articles. Our original focused on the Journal of Regulation and Governance was used to both revise our 4PT distinctions, and then to go back, recode, and assess intercoder reliability. However, our approach to coding abstracts for course syllabi at Yale’s environment schools was much swifter and faster – as we only needed to see whether the course championed a utility outcome or not, and whether it was focused on applying its approach to specific on the ground problems. Both coding exercises permitted the development of dominant “key words” within each both deductively and inductively. This means that one solution for accelerating coding through quantitively analysis of text is to identify the prevalence of different key words associated with one problem type over the others. Of course this approach is not perfect because sometimes some concepts such as “cost effectiveness” analysis can be used to achieve any kind of Type 4, 3 2 and 1 outcomes, while “cost benefit” reinforces Type 2. It may be difficult for using a key word approach alone to therefore uncover these nuances. Hence, while this approach may not be as nuanced as the human coding orientation, it promises to provide more swift data that itself, will be useful. And as along as standardizes approach is taken, it will still produce useful data even if that set might be slightly different than if laborious human coders had applied our more nuanced approach. Finally, and to integrate these different efforts, our ultimate goal is to draw on AI techniques that might best replicate human coding, but in much less time.

Another challenges concerns whether an article is simply categorized by asking and answer the two distinguishing questions, or, to save, time, whether a sorting approach can be undertaken through a “branching tree” metaphore: i.e. first ask: “utility” if so, (1 or 2) then ask  “problem contingent?, if so 1 or 4. Under this approach Type 3 emerges because other types are excluded, rather than affirmatively coding for Type 3. The problem with this approach – and which tripped us up initially – was that Type 3 was more likely to include ambiguous cases and or cases beyond our universe (i.e. they did not actually pertain to policy and governance). As a result, we had to regroup and instead encourage coders to identify each one according to the two categories, and then to note cases where they simply could not figure out how to best apply the code book (which meant we needed to revise and provide better guidance) and/or be clearer about whether a paper was in or out of our universe. For example, we excluded purely science based classes from our review of Yale’s environment school, since most science based classes provided basic knowledge about problems – which might appear to be Type 4- but because they didn’t identify policy or governance solutions – where actually not part of our universe of analyses.
